situation described in a widely known Indian legend about blind men and an elephant. As the legend goes, six blind men were trying to find out what an elephant looks like. They touched different parts of the elephant and quickly jumped to their conclusions. The one touching the body said it must be like a wall; the one touching the tail said it is like a snake; the one touching the legs said it is like a tree trunk; etc. But science does not stand still; the steady stream of new scientific literature creates a continuously changing structure. The resulting disappearance, fusion, and emergence of research areas ads another twist to the legend – it is as if the elephant is running and dynamically changing in shape. Domain visualization is an emerging field of study that is in a similar situation. Relevant literature is spread across disciplines that traditionally have few connections. Researchers looking at the domain from a particular discipline cannot possibly have an adequate understanding of the whole. As noted by White and McCain (1997), the new generation of information scientists are on the one hand technically driven in the new rush of visualizing scientific disciplines. On the other hand, they are rather limited with regard to what has been done in terms of bridging between pioneers' theories and practices and today's more enabling technologies. If the difference between the past and present generations is in the power of available technologies, what they have in common is the ultimate goal – to reveal the development of scientific knowledge. Today’s use of this knowledge has expanded to include studies of scholarly communities and networks, the growth and evolution of fields, the diffusion of research topics, individual authors, or institutions, etc. The survey of White and McCain (1997) was done in a traditional way, i.e., using manual and intellectual analysis. Since then the size and the scope of the field has exploded and it is now well beyond the reach of traditional survey methods. The types of enabling techniques needed to do current analyses quickly and effectively are precisely the ones that belong to the domain visualization toolkit. These new techniques allow us to streamline the practice with an unprecedented scalability and repeatability. To form the big picture itself is also a typical problem in domain visualization. How to choose the source of data, how to analyze and visualize the data, and how to make sense of what is in the picture, are decisions to be made by the new generation of information cartographers. This work does not attempt to update the work of the former survey by providing an extensive bibliography with commentary on the field of literature mapping and visualization, but rather provides an overview of the many techniques and variations used in the process of mapping and visualizing knowledge domains. It also offers an opportunity to compare and contrast several different visualizations of the same data so as to illustrate characteristics of particular mapping techniques. This chapter does not cover some potentially relevant and important issues including user and task analysis, alternative input/output devices, visual perception principles, or evaluation of map relevance. The balance of this covers the following information. Section 2 sketches the history of research on visualizing knowledge domains that is rooted in fields such as scientometrics, bibliometrics, citation analysis, and information visualization. Section 3 explains the general process flow of visualizing knowledge domains and the general structure of this chapter. We then review measures and approaches to determine bibliographic, linguistic, co-word, co-term, co-
classification, content, or semantic similarities. Section 4 provides an overview of different mathematical techniques that are commonly used to analyze and visualize bibliographic data. Appropriate visualization and interaction metaphors ensuring that resulting maps can be intuitively and effectively used are introduced as well. Section 5 introduces a bibliographic data set of considerable size that will be utilized in this paper to map research on the visualization of knowledge domains in section 6. We conclude with a discussion of promising new avenues of research and a general discussion. 2 HISTORY
Narin and Molls (1977) and White and McCain (1989) compiled the very first ARIST reviews of bibliometrics research. In (1997), White and McCain gave a vivid account of the history of citation analysis and its application to the visualization of literatures. Borgman in (1990; 2000) and her recent ARIST chapter with Furner (2002) gave a comprehensive overview of bibliometric methods that can be used to describe, explain, predict, and evaluate scholarly communication. Wilson’s recent, very comprehensive review on informetrics covers bibliometrics research as well as other metric studies (2001). An in-depth account of theories and practices in the endeavor of mapping scientific frontiers is also the central topic of a forthcoming book (Chen, 2002). 2.1 Scientometrics, Bibliometrics, and Citation Analysis
Today’s wide availability of citation index databases originated in the 1950s. Indexing in the 1950s was inconsistent and uncoordinated. There was widespread dissatisfaction with the array of traditional discipline-oriented indexing and abstracting services (Garfield, 1955). Eugene Garfield's pioneering paper in Science (Garfield, 1955) laid down the foundation of citation analysis today. In the words of White and McCain (1998): “Eugene Garfield, the founder of ISI, devoted years to fulfilling his dream of creating a multidisciplinary citation index. The development of the Science Citation Index represented a fundamental breakthrough in scientific information retrieval. What began as a commercial product—a unique resource for scientists, scholars, and researchers in virtually every field of intellectual endeavor—has evolved into a sophisticated set of conceptual tools for understanding the dynamics of science. The concept of citation analysis today forms the basis of much of what is known variously as scientometrics, bibliometrics, infometrics, cybermetrics, and webometrics. Garfield's invention continues to have a profound impact on the way we think about and study scholarly communication.” One of the pioneering domain visualization studies based on citation data is the creation of the historical map of research in DNA, which was done manually almost 40 years ago in early 1960s (Garfield, Sher, & Torpie, 1964). Soon thereafter Derek Price studied the same data in his classic work of mapping scientific networks (Price, 1961, 1963; Price, 1965). In domain visualization, interrelationships between research fronts are represented through spatial representations. Such spatial representations allow users to navigate the scientific literature based on the spatial patterns depicted.
Domain visualization aims to reveal realms of scientific communication as reflected through scientific literature and citation paths interwoven by individual scientists in their publications. There is indeed a profound connection between domain visualization and what Hjørland (1997) called domain analysis. Domain visualization can provide enabling techniques needed for domain analysis, especially in multidisciplinary and fast-moving knowledge domains. The field of domain visualization is also called scientography (Garfield, 1994), although the term scientography does not seem to be widely used. Garfield (1994) also introduced the concept of longitudinal mapping. In longitudinal mapping, a series of chronologically sequential maps can be used to detect the advances of scientific knowledge. Analysts and domain experts can use longitudinal maps to forecast emerging trends for a subject domain. Since domain visualizations typically reference key works in a field, they are a good tool to enable the novice to become familiar with a field through easy identification of landmark articles and books, as well as members of the invisible college or specialties. The Web of Knowledge, released in 2000 to commemorate Dr. Eugene Garfield’s 75th birthday, comprehensively addresses the history, theory, and practical applications of citation indexing and analysis (Cronin & Atkins, 2000). Scientometrics is a distinct discipline that has emerged from citation-based domain visualization. Scientometrics is the quantitative study of scientific communications, which applies bibliometrics to scientific literature. Robert Merton and Eugene Garfield regard the late Derek De Solla Price (1922-1983) as the “father of scientometrics.” Price made profound contributions to information science through his seminal work on networks of scientific papers (Price, 1965) as well as his landmark work Little Science, Big Science, and Beyond (Price, 1986). In 1981, the Institute for Scientific Information (ISI) published the pioneering Atlas of Science in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (1981). The Atlas was constructed based on a co-citation index associated with publications in the field over a one-year period. It featured 102 distinct clusters of articles. These clusters, representing research front specialties, form a snapshot of significant research activities in biochemistry and molecular biology. The construction of this pioneering Atlas took several months. Garfield and Small (1989) explained the role of citation structures in identifying the changing frontiers of science. More recently, ISI has developed the SCI-Map software, which enables users to navigate a citation network. It has been used in numerous subject domains, including physics, chemistry, quantum systems, and other fields. For example, in 1994, Henry Small used SCI-Map to map AIDS research (Small, 1994). SCI-Map creates maps of individual research areas specified by the user. Given an author, paper, or keyword as a starting point, one can seed a map and then grow the map by specifying various desired connections at different thresholds of co-citation strength or distance. The network of connected nodes is formed by a series of iterations of clustering, including additional core papers with each successive node. The nodes are selected according to the strength of their links, and positioning is determined by the geometric triangulation method (see section 4.3.1). In his most recent work, Small explored the notion of a passage through science (Small, 1999a, 2000). Passages linking the literature of different disciplines are likely to import or export a
method established in one discipline into another. This has been known as cross-disciplinary fertilization. As Small has noted, this reaching out or stretching can import or export methods, ideas, models, or empirical results from the author’s field to the other field. This requires scientists to have not only a broad awareness of literature, but also the creative imagination to foresee how the outside information fits with the problem at hand. He developed algorithms to blaze a magnificent trail of more than 300 articles across the literatures of different scientific disciplines. When speaking of citation indexing, one must also consider the Web-based citation database system ResearchIndex (formerly CiteSeer) developed by researchers at NEC Research Institute (Lawrence, Giles, & Bollacker, 1999). ResearchIndex allows users to search for various citation details of scientific documents available on the Web. This service provides a valuable complementary resource to ISI’s citation databases. ResearchIndex takes advantage of being able to access full text versions of scientific documents on the Web by introducing a functionality called citation context. Not only can users search the database on various bibliographic attributes of a document such as the author, article title, and journal title, but they can also use the citation context function to retrieve a list of highlights as excerpts from citing documents and access detailed statements of its perceived value. This function provides an invaluable tool for researchers to judge the nature of an influential article. Typically, the act of referencing another author's work in a scholarly or research paper is assumed to reflect a direct semantic relationship between the citing and cited works. However, a macroanalysis of cited and citing documents in terms of broad subject dispersion and a microanalysis that examined the subject relationship between citing and cited documents presented by (Harter, Nisonger, & Weng, 1993; Nisonger, Harter, & Weng, 1992) suggest that the subject similarity among pairs of cited and citing documents is typically very small, supporting a subjective, psychological view of relevance and a trial-and-error, heuristic understanding of the information search and research processes. The notion of bibliometric mapping has been further developed by researchers in the Netherlands, in particular Noyons and van Raan (Noyons, Moed, & Luwel, 1999; Noyons & Van Raan, 1998; van Raan, 2000). Noyons and van Raan have developed special mathematical techniques for bibliometric mapping. The basic assumption is that each research field can be characterized by a list of the most important keywords. Each publication in the field can in turn be characterized by a sub-list of these global keywords. Such sub-lists are like DNA fingerprints of these published articles. By matching keyword-based fingerprints, one can measure the similarity between a pair of publications. The more keywords two documents have in common, the more similar the two publications are, and the more likely they come from the same research area or research specialty at a higher level. Following the DNA metaphor, if two publications’ fingerprints are similar enough, they are bound to come from the same species. In (Noyons, Moed, & Luwel, 1999), they incorporate performance assessment into the creation of bibliometric maps in order to measure the impact level of different sub-fields and themes and to address strategic questions such as: who is where in the subject domain, and how strong is their research?

2.2 Map Generation and Visualization
In 1987, the National Science Foundation (NSF) panel report (McCormick, DeFanti, & Brown) recommended that NSF fund immediate and longer-term research in what is now known as the field of scientific visualization. At that time, there were about 200 supercomputers in the United States. These supercomputers generated a vast amount of numerical data, mainly through computationally intensive simulation of physical processes. Virtual wind tunnels and highresolution predictive weather models are typical examples of scientific calculations that require visualization to present their output in an understandable form. Scientific visualizations map physical phenomena onto 2D or 3D representations that are typically not very interactive. In contrast, Information Visualization (IV) aims at an interactive visualization of abstract non-spatial phenomena such as bibliographic data sets, web access patterns, etc. Advances of information visualization were significantly driven by information retrieval research. A central problem for information retrieval researchers and practitioners is how to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of information retrieval. Generally speaking, the more a user knows about her search space, the more likely that her search will become more effective. Many information visualization systems depict the overall semantic structure of a collection of documents. Users can use this structural visualization as the basis for their subsequent browsing and search. Card (1996) and Hearst (1999) gave surveys of visualizing retrieval results. Edward Tufte has published three seminal books (Tufte, 1983; 1990, 1997) on display and visualization. Although his 1983 and 1990 books were published prior to the emergence of information visualization as a distinct field, they are highly regarded in the information visualization community. In particular, Tufte’s in-depth case study on the disaster of the launch of the space shuttle Challenger is a though-provoking example. Research in hypertext started to emerge as a distinct field of study in late 1980s following a number of pioneering hypertext systems, notably HyperCard from Apple and NoteCards from Xerox PARC (Halasz, 1988; Halasz, Moran, & Trigg, 1986). A core issue of hypertext research is to enable users to easily navigate in hypertext spaces (Conklin, 1987). The thinking-byassociation tradition of hypertext and the World-Wide Web later on has been widely attributed to the visionary Memex envisaged by Vannevar Bush (Bush, 1945). Researchers have studied a variety of navigation cues to help users to move around. One of the most popular recommendations for designers of hypertext systems is to have an overview map of the entire hypertext structure (Halasz, 1988). Advances have been made in automatically generating overview maps that can help users navigate. The mid-1990s saw a wide spread use of the WorldWide Web. The sheer size of the Web has posed an unprecedented challenge for mapping. Geographic Information Systems (GIS) represent a gray area between information visualization and traditional cartography. Geographic coordinates provide a most convenient and natural organizing framework. A geographic framework can accommodate a wide variety of information. Thematic maps provide a rich metaphor for a class of information visualization known as information landscape. Notable examples include SPIRE/Themescape (Wise et al.,
1995) and BEAD (Chalmers, 1992). A recent book by Martin Dodge and Rob Kitchin (2000) is a good source of examples of how geography influences mapping cyberspace. The number of review and survey articles on information visualization is steadily increasing (Card, 1996; Hearst, 1999; Herman, Melançon, & Marshall, 2000; Hollan, Bederson, & Helfman, 1997; Mukherjea, 1999). The first edited volume (Card, Mackinlay, & Shneiderman, 1999) and the first authored monograph (Chen, 1999a) both appeared in 1999. There are currently about a half dozen books on the market on information visualization (Card et al., 1999; Chen, 1999a; Spence, 2000, 2001; Ware, 2000), as well as a related book on algorithms for graph visualization (Battista, Eades, Tamassia, & Tollis, 1999). A new, peer-reviewed international journal Information Visualization is to be launched in March 2002 by Palgrave, Macmillan's global academic publishing. Today, there are numerous workshops and special issues held all over the world relating to information visualization. Journals such as the Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology (JASIST) and Scientometrics have provided the focal forum for domain visualization. These journals traditionally have their main readership in Library and Information Science (LIS), rather than from other potentially relevant disciplines such as computer science, information visualization, and geographic information systems. In the past 15 years, information retrieval has enjoyed its prominent position in the mainstream information visualization research, but other research areas such as citation analysis and domain analysis remain tied to a relatively focused scientific community. Major information visualization and interaction design techniques as they pertain to the visualization of knowledge domains are discussed in section 4.4. 3 PROCESS FLOW OF VISUALIZING KNOWLEDGE DOMAINS
White and McCain (1997) defined five models of literatures: (1) bibliographic, (2) editorial, (3) bibliometric, (4) user, and (5) synthetic. With the computerized tools and techniques available today, the lines between these traditional models can become blurred. The model used by many researchers today might be described as a USER META MODEL. It is first a user model in that it is a reduction of the literature based on a user’s searches, queries, profiles, or filters, often generated quickly from computerized access to literature data sources, and formulated to provide answers to specific questions. It fulfills the role of the bibliographic or meta model in that it contains metadata – authors, titles, descriptive terms, dates, etc. – that can be used to define relationships pertinent to mapping, and also to display attributes of the data in modern visualizations. These data also often contain, or can easily be used to generate, bibliometric data – citation counts, term distributions, attributes by year, impact factors, etc. – that can be easily displayed by visualizations and that enhance map interpretation. Bibliometric attributes also allow for thresholds and rankings, which can be used to limit data to those deemed most pertinent or important by the user. The user meta model is closely related to the process by which domain maps or visualizations are produced. An overview of this process, with many of its possible perturbations, is shown in Figure 1. The general steps in this sequence are (1) data extraction, (2) definition of unit of analysis, (3) selection of measures, (4) calculation of a similarity between units, (5) ordination,
or the assignment of coordinates to each unit, and (6) use of the resulting visualization for analysis and interpretation. Steps four and five of this process are often distilled into one operation, which can be described as data layout.
DATA UNIT OF MEASURES LAYOUT (often one code does both similarity and ordination steps) DISPLAY EXTRACTION ANALYSIS SIMILARITY ORDINATION
SEARCHES COMMON COUNTS/FREQUENCIES SCALAR (unit by unit matrix) DIMENSIONALITY REDUCTION INTERACTION ISI CHOICES Attributes (e.g. terms) Direct citation Eigenvector/ Eigenvalue solutions Browse INSPEC Journal Author citations Co-citation Factor Analysis (FA) and Pan Eng Index Document Co-citations Combined linkage Principal Components Analysis (PCA) Zoom Medline Author By year Co-word / co-term Multi-dimensional scaling (MDS) Filter ResearchIndex Term Co-classification Pathfinder networks (PFNet) Query Patents THRESHOLDS Self-organizing maps (SOM) Detail on demand etc. By counts VECTOR (unit by attribute matrix) includes SOM, ET-maps, etc. Vector space model (words/terms) ANALYSIS BROADENING Latent Semantic Analysis (words/terms) CLUSTER ANALYSIS By citation incl. Singular Value Decomp (SVD) By terms SCALAR CORRELATION (if desired) Triangulation Pearson's R on any of above Force-directed placement (FDP)
The next few sections of this paper will address the process described in Figure 1. The balance of section 3 is used to review units of analysis, measures, and simple approaches to determine appropriate similarities between units. Section 4 is designed to address both the Figure 1 process and two major problems in communicating information: (1) multivariate data need to be displayed on the two-dimensional surface of either paper or computer screen and (2) large amounts of data must be displayed in a limited space with limited resolution. The first problem is tackled by applying mathematical dimensionality reduction algorithms to map n-dimensional data into a 2-D or 3-D space. The purpose of these algorithms is to place objects that are similar to one another in n-dimensions close to each other and to place dissimilar objects far apart. This process is also called ordination. Cluster techniques can be used to further group similar objects together. Commonly used techniques are presented in section 4. The second problem is typically minimized by applying interaction (panning, filtering) and distortion techniques (fisheye) as discussed in section 4.4. The general consensus in relevant fields such as information visualization and geographic cartography is that multiple maps are preferred to a single map whenever possible. This is because each map may show different insights from the same data set. Therefore, section 5 introduces a bibliographic data set of the subject domain that will be utilized to demonstrate the different similarity measures, data mining techniques, and visualization approaches. Section 6 shows multiple maps and comparisons of the example bibliographic data set, focusing on the key issues and key components uncovered through this multi-perspective approach.

3.1 Units of Analysis
The first step in any mapping process is the extraction of appropriate data, as will be exemplified in section 7. We will not deal further with the extraction issue, search strategies, or the like, but simply note that the quality of any mapping or visualization is necessarily constrained by the quality of underlying data. The number of documents retrieved to generate a domain map can range from several hundred to tens of thousands. Selection of a unit of analysis, relevant to the questions one desires to answer, is the second step. The most common units in the mapping of literatures are journals, documents, authors, and descriptive terms or words. Each presents different facets of a domain and enables different types of analysis. For instance, a map of journals can be used to obtain a macro view of science (Bassecoulard & Zitt, 1999), showing the relative positions and relationships between major disciplines. Journal maps are also used on a much smaller scale (Ding, Chowdhury, & Foo, 2000; Leydesdorff, 1994; McCain, 1998) to show fine distinctions within a discipline. Documents (articles, patents, etc.) are the most common unit used to map or visualize a knowledge domain. These maps are used for a variety of purposes, including document retrieval, domain analysis (Small, 1999a, 2000), informing policy decisions, or assessing research performance (Noyons, 2001; Noyons, Moed, & Luwel, 1999; Noyons, Moed, & Van Raan, 1999; Noyons & Van Raan, 1998; Noyons & van Raan, 1998), and science and technology management or competitive intelligence (Boyack, Wylie, & Davidson, 2002). Author-based maps are also relatively common and occur in two main forms. Author co-citation maps (Chen, 1999b; Chen, Paul, & O'Keefe, 2001; Ding, Chowdhury, & Foo, 1999; Lin & Kaid, 2000; White & McCain, 1998) are typically used to infer the intellectual structure of a field. By contrast, co-authorship maps are used to show the social network of a discipline or department (Mahlck & Persson, 2000). Co-authorship maps have been used by Glanzel and co-workers at the Hungarian Academy of Sciences for a series of studies designed to reveal international collaborations (Glänzel, 2001; Glänzel & DeLange, 1997). Newman has studied the structure of scientific networks from a statistical point of view (Newman, 2001a, 2001b). His techniques, while not done from a mapping or visualization perspective, are relevant and scale to very large systems (e.g., 1.5 million authors from Medline). Semantic maps, often known as co-word analyses, are used to understand the cognitive structure of a field (Bhattacharya & Basu, 1998; Cahlik, 2000; DeLooze & Lemarie, 1997; He, 1999; Salvador & Lopez-Martinez, 2000). These are generated from different textual sources including single words extracted from titles of articles, descriptive terms, or publisher-assigned descriptors supplied by a database vendor (e.g., ISI keywords). Earlier maps were enabled by the popularization and use of the Leximappe software (Callon, Courtial, Turner, & Bauin, 1983). However, Leximappe never really reached the US – researchers here tended to use standard bibliographic retrieval software (e.g., Dialog searching or Word Start) to collect co-descriptor or co-classification data. Ron Kostoff at the Office of Naval Research even wrote his own programs for co-word extraction and analysis. Many users today have computational tools2 that allow them to do their own term extraction and mapping. Kostoff and coworkers have developed the
 2 For example, WordStat, available at http://www.simstat.com/wordstat.htm
Database Tomography technique, which they use to create science and technology roadmaps (Kostoff, Eberhart, & Toothman, 1998). Some confusion can be caused by reference to “semantic space” – which most often refers not to co-word maps, but rather to document maps using words or terms as labeling features. There is no explicit reason why multiple units (e.g., journals and authors) cannot be used in the same map, but it is not commonly done. One example of multiple units is the work by White and Griffith (1982), an author co-citation study in which useful phrases were used to “self-label” factors. 3.2 Measures and Similarity Calculation

3.2.1 Measures
Measures have been defined very succinctly by White and McCain (1997), and rather than muddy the waters, we simply choose to quote their work here for completeness: “We use certain technical terms such as intercitation, interdocument, coassignment, co-classification, co-citation, and co-word. The prefix ‘inter-‘ implies relationships between documents [or units]. The prefix ‘co-‘ implies joint occurrences within a single document [or unit]. Thus, intercitation data for journals are counts of the times that any journal cites any other journal, as well as itself, in a matrix. (The citations appear in articles, of course.) The converse is the number of times any journal is cited by any other journal. The same sort of matrix can be formed with authors replacing journals. Interdocument similarity can be measured by counting indicators of content that two different documents have in common, such as descriptors or references to other writings (the latter is known as bibliographic coupling strength). Co-assignment means the assignment of two indexing terms to the same document by an indexer (the terms themselves might be called co-terms, co-descriptors, or co-classifications). Co-citation occurs when any two works appear in the references of a third work. The authors of the two co-cited works are co-cited authors. If the co-cited works appeared in two different journals, the latter are co-cited journals. Co-words are words that appear together in some piece of natural language, such as a title or abstract. Bother ‘inter-‘ and ‘co-‘ relationships are explicit and potentially countable by computer. Thus, both might yield raw data for visualization of literatures.” To this we add a few definitions. A “citation” is the referencing of a document by a more recently published document. The document doing the citing is the “citing” document, and the one receiving the citation is the “cited” document. Citations may be counted and used as a threshold (e.g., only keep the documents that have been cited more than 5 times) in a mapping exercise. Other terms used to describe citing and cited numbers are “in-degree” or the number of times cited, and “out-degree” or the number of items in a document’s reference list. Journal impact factors calculated from citation counts are published by ISI, and can be used to enhance
visualizations, as can the raw citation counts themselves.3 An excellent review of bibliometric and other science indicators was also provided by King (1987). 3.2.2 Simple Similarities
Similarity between units is typically based on one of the following. Citation linkages – These include direct citation linkage, co-citation linkage4, bibliographic coupling (Kessler, 1963), longitudinal coupling (Small, 1995), and Small’s combined linkage method (Small, 1997). Citation linkage similarities are naturally constrained to use with data derived from citation databases, such as the Science Citation Index or a patent database. Co-occurrence similarities – The most common co-occurrence similarities include co-term, coclassification, author co-citation, and paper co-citation. Two of the more common similarity formulas used with co-occurrence are the simple cosine and Jaccard indices. Each counts the number of attributes common between two units (e.g., the number of terms in common between two articles), but differ in their normalization. Chen and Lynch (1992) developed an asymmetric cluster function and showed that it better represents term associations than the popular cosine function. Chung and Lee (2001) recently compared six different co-term association measures and discuss their relative behavior on a set of documents. Rorvig (1999) explored multiple similarity measurements on TREC document sets, finding that cosine and overlap measures best preserved relationships between documents. The co-word similarity uses the same types of associations as the co-term, but is commonly based on words extracted from the titles and/or abstracts of articles by counting the number of times any two words appear in the same text segment. 3.2.3 Vector Space Model
The Vector Space Model (VSM) was developed by Gerald Salton (Salton, Yang, & Wong, 1975). It is an influential and powerful framework for storing, analyzing, and structuring documents. Originally developed for information retrieval, the model is a widely used framework for indexing documents based on term frequencies. Its three stages are document indexing, term weighting, and computation of similarity coefficients: • Document indexing: Each document (or query) is represented as a vector in a high dimensional space. Dimensionality is determined by the number of unique terms in a document corpus. Non-significant words are removed from the document vector. A stop list, which holds common words, is used to remove high frequency words.5 • Term weighting: Terms are weighted to indicate their importance for document representation. Most of the weighting schemes such as the inverse document
 3 Nederhof and Zwaan (1991) collected peer judgments on the quality of journals by means of a world-wide mail survey among 385 scholars and probed the quality of the coverage by the SSCI and the AHCI of both core and noncore journals. Results showed convergence with those based on journal impact factors. 4 Co-citation is known to have a low “recall” of clusters because only papers which have citation links within the data set and the defined time window can be classified. “Co-citation and bibliographical coupling offer cross sectional views given narrow, one year citing periods. Longitudinal coupling becomes effective only when wider periods are used. At the end of a time period documents will be linked through their references to earlier items, while at the beginning, linking will be through citations received.” (Small, 1997, p.278-279). 5 In general, 40-50% of the total number of words in a document is removed.
frequency (see below) assume that the importance of a term is proportional to the number of documents the term appears in. Long documents usually have a much larger term set than short documents, which makes long documents more likely to be retrieved than short documents. Therefore, document length normalization is employed. • Computation of similarity coefficients: The similarity between any two documents (or between a query and a document) can subsequently be determined by the distance between vectors in a high-dimensional space. Word overlap indicates similarity. The most popular similarity measure is the cosine coefficient, which defines the similarity between two documents by the cosine of the angle between their two vectors. It resembles the inner product of the two vectors, normalized (divided) by the products of the vector lengths (square root of the sums of squares). The discriminative power of a term is determined by the well-known tf × idf model, in which tf denotes the term frequency and idf represents the inverse document frequency. Each document can be represented by an array of terms T and each term is associated with a weight determined by the tf × idf model. In general, the weight of term Tk in document Di, is estimated as follows:
where tfik is the number of occurrences of term Tk in Di, N is the number of documents in a given collection, and nk represents the number of documents containing term Tk. The document similarity is computed as follows based on corresponding vectors Di = (wi1, wi2, ..., wiT) and Dj = (wj1, wj2, ..., wjT):
Document similarity can be used to group a large collection of documents into a number of smaller clusters such that documents within a cluster are more similar than documents in different clusters. The vector space model provides an easy way to assess document similarities based on word matches. Note that different meaning of words – e.g., the bird “crane” and the “crane” on a construction site – cannot be detected. This is known as the "vocabulary mismatch problem" the solution of which requires methods that examine the context of words such as Latent Semantic Analysis (see section 4.1.2); Lexical Chaining, a notion derived from work in the area of textual cohesion in linguistics (Halliday & Hasan, 1976); or the automatic discovery of vocabulary and thesauri (Mostafa, Quiroga, & Palakal, 1998). Different applications of the vector space model are presented in (Salton, Allan, & Buckley, 1994; Salton, Allan, Buckley, & Singhal, 1994; Salton & Buckley, 1988, 1991; Salton et al., 1975). For a critical analysis of the vector space model for information retrieval consult (Raghavan & Wong, 1986).

4 ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES
This section describes enabling techniques with regard to the analysis and visualization of knowledge. In particular, we describe methods that are generally used to create (interactive) visualizations of knowledge domains. Subsection 4.1 will introduce dimensionality reduction techniques that can be applied to represent n-dimensional data by a small number of salient dimensions and thus to display multivariate data on the two-dimensional surface of either paper or computer screen. Several of these algorithms produce a 2-D or 3-D spatial layout in which similar objects are close to one another. This process is also called ordination. Cluster analysis, presented in subsection 4.2, can be used to further group similar objects together, and to determine category boundaries and labels. Some of the algorithms presented in subsection 4.1 generate a document-by-document similarity matrix that can be visualized by spatial configuration algorithms, see subsection 4.3. Last but not least, subsection 4.4 presents the application of interaction and distortion techniques that aim to solve the second information communication problem – to display large amounts of data must be displayed in a limited space with limited resolution. For each technique we will give a general description, discuss its value for visualizing knowledge domains, and give references to further reading and code if available. We conclude with a general comparison of different techniques. 4.1 Dimensionality Reduction Techniques
Dimensionality reduction is an effective way to derive useful representations of highdimensional data. This section reviews a range of techniques that have been used for dimensionality reduction, including Eigenvalue/Eigenvector decomposition, Factor Analysis (FA), Multidimensional Scaling (MDS), Pathfinder Network Scaling (PF), and Self-Organizing Maps (SOMs).6 4.1.1 Eigenvalue/Eigenvector Decomposition
Eigenvalue/Eigenvector decomposition is a technique that has been widely used in scientific computation. Given an N × N matrix A, if there exist a vector v and a scalar value λ such that Av = λv. The vector v is an eigenvector, and the scalar value λ is a corresponding eigenvalue. Eigenvalue/Eigenvector decomposition is commonly used to reduce the dimensionality of a high-dimensional space while its internal structure is preserved. A related technique is called singular value decomposition (SVD), which is used in Latent Semantic Analysis (see sction 4.1.4). Given a collection of points in a high-dimensional space, the eigenvalues of the covariance matrix reveal the underlying dimensionality of the space. Eigenvector analysis techniques encompass Principal Components Analysis (see section 4.1.2) and Empirical Orthogonal Functional Analysis. Common features of these eigenvalue problems are (1) the number of
 6 Principal component analysis is used in Eigenvalue and factor analysis. However, Eigen solutions can give coordinates for each document, while a factor analysis doesn’t.
eigenvalues required is small relative to the size of the matrices and (2) the matrix systems are often very sparse or structured. Sandia’s VxInsight has the option of using an eigenvalue solver (Davidson, Hendrickson, Johnson, Meyers, & Wylie, 1998). However, in practice this solution, while mathematically robust, does not necessarily place dissimilar objects far apart and does not tend to produce discrete clusters. 4.1.2 Factor Analysis and Principal Components Analysis
The term Factor Analysis (FA) was first introduced by Thurstone (1931). Factor analysis is a multivariate exploratory technique that can be used to examine a wide range of data sets. Primary applications of factor analytic techniques are: (1) to reduce the number of variables and (2) to detect structure in the relationships between variables, or to classify variables. Therefore, factor analysis is applied as a data reduction or structure detection method. Contrary to other methods such as LSA, the factors can often be interpreted. A key method in factor analysis is Principal Component Analysis (PCA), which can transform a number of (possibly) correlated variables into a (smaller) number of uncorrelated variables called principal components. The first principal component accounts for as much of the variability in the data as possible, and each succeeding component accounts for as much of the remaining variability as possible. An advantage of using factor analysis over traditional clustering techniques is that it does not force each object into a cluster. Objects can be classified in multiple factors, thus preserving an important type of phenomenon: truly important work is often universal. There are many excellent books on factor analysis such as (Basilevsky, 1994; Gorsuch, 1983; Harman, 1976). PCA has been routinely used by information scientists, especially in author cocitation analysis (Chen & Carr, 1999; McCain, 1990, 1995; Raghupathi & Nerur, 1999; White & McCain, 1998). PCA was also employed in SPIRE (Hetzler, Whitney, Martucci, & Thomas, 1998; Wise, 1999; Wise et al., 1995), using a context vector similar to those constructed in LSA. 4.1.3 Multidimensional Scaling
Multidimensional Scaling (MDS) attempts to find the structure in a set of proximity measures between objects (Kruskal, 1977). This is accomplished by solving a minimization problem such that the distances between points in the conceptual low-dimensional space match the given (dis)similarities as closely as possible. The result is a least-squares representation of the objects in a lower (often 2-dimensional) space. The MDS procedure is as follows: • All objects and their distances are determined. • A goodness-of-fit measure called stress is maximized to produce a scatterplot of the objects in a low-dimensional space. • The dimensions are interpreted, keeping in mind that the actual orientations of the axes from the MDS analysis are arbitrary, and can be rotated in any direction. In
addition, one can look for clusters of points or particular patterns and configurations (such as circles, manifolds, etc.). The real value of MDS is that it can be used to analyze any kind of distance or similarity matrix. These similarities can represent people's ratings of similarities between documents, similarity between objects based on co-citations, etc. Due to computational requirements, only small data sets can be processed with MDS. Additionally, no relationship data (links) can be displayed. There are numerous texts available for further reading (Borg & Groenen, 1996; Joseph Kruskal, B., 1964; Joseph B. Kruskal, 1964; Kruskal & Wish, 1984). KYST is a flexible Fortran program developed by Kruskal, Young, and Seery for MDS which is available on the Internet.7,8
A long acknowledged major weakness of MDS is that there are no quick and fast rules to interpret the nature of the resulting dimensions. In addition, analysts often need more local details and more explicit representations of structures. An MDS configuration is limited in meeting these needs. The use of Pathfinder Network Scaling technique and Pathfinder networks provide users with additional local details and explicit representations of structures than MDS configurations (see section 4.1.5). MDS has been one of the most widely used mapping techniques in information science, especially for document visualization (Chalmers, 1992), author co-citation analysis (White & McCain, 1998), document analysis (Hetzler et al., 1998), science mapping (Small, 1999b), and visualizing group memories9 (McQuaid, Ong, Chen, & Nunamaker, 1999), and performance assessment (Noyons, Moed, & Van Raan, 1999) to name just a few. Recently, nonlinear MDS approaches have been proposed that promise to handle larger data sets. Examples are the global geometric framework for nonlinear dimensionality reduction named Isomap10 proposed in (Tenenbaum, de Silva, & Langford, 2000) and nonlinear dimensionality reduction by locally linear embedding proposed by (Roweis & Saul, 2000). Both techniques have not been applied to the visualization of knowledge domains yet. 4.1.4 Latent Semantic Analysis
Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA), also called Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI), was developed to resolve the so-called vocabulary mismatch problem (Deerwester, Dumais, Landauer, Furnas, & Harshman, 1990; Landauer, Foltz, & Laham, 1998). LSA handles synonymy (variability in human word choice) and polysemy (same word has often different meanings) by considering the context of words. It uses an advanced statistical technique, singular value decomposition (SVD), to extract latent terms. A latent term may correspond to a salient concept that may be described by several keywords, for example, the concept of human-computer interaction. The procedure is as follows: • Representative samples of documents are converted to matrix of title/authors/abstract words by articles. Cell entries are word frequencies in the title/authors/abstract of a given document.
 7 http://elib.zib.de/netlib/mds/kyst.f. 8 http://elib.zib.de/netlib/mds/kyst2a_manual.txt 9 See http://ai.bpa.arizona.edu/go/viz/mds.html for an online demo. 10 http://isomap.stanford.edu/
• After an information theoretic weighting of cell entries, the matrix is submitted to singular value decomposition (SVD). • SVD constructs an n-dimensional abstract semantic space in which each original word is presented as a vector. • LSA's representation of a document is the average of the vectors of the words it contains independent of their order. Construction of the SVD matrix is computationally expensive. There are also cases in which the matrix size cannot be reduced effectively. Yet, an effective dimensionality reduction helps to reduce noise and automatically organizes documents into a semantic structure more appropriate for information retrieval. This is a prime strength of LSA – once the matrix has been calculated, retrieval based on a user’s query is very efficient. Relevant documents are retrieved, even if they did not literally contain the query words. The LSA matrix can also be used to calculate term-byterm or document-by-document similarities for use in other layout routines. There are numerous LSA web resources including the Telcordia (formerly BellCore) LSI page11, a web site at the University of Colorado12, or the University of Tennessee13. SVDPACKC14 (Version 1.0) developed by Michael Berry comprises four numerical (iterative) methods for computing the singular value decomposition of large sparse matrices using double precision ANSI Fortran-77. The General Text Parser15 (GTP), developed by Howard, Tang, Berry, and Martin at the University of Tennessee, is an object-oriented (C++) integrated software package for creating data structures and encoding needed by information retrieval models. LSA has been used in Generalized Similarity Analysis (Chen, 1997b, 1999b), StarWalker (Chen & Paul, 2001), and the LVis - Digital Library Visualizer (Katy Börner, 2000; Börner, Dillon, & Dolinsky, 2000) visualizations, among others. LSA has also been used by Porter and colleagues for technology forecasting (Zhu & Porter, 2002). 4.1.5 Pathfinder Network Scaling
Pathfinder Network Scaling is a structural and procedural modeling technique which extracts underlying patterns in proximity data and represents them spatially in a class of networks called Pathfinder Networks (PFnets) (Schvaneveldt, 1990). Pathfinder algorithms take estimates of the proximities between pairs of items as input and define a network representation of the items that preserves only the most important links. The resulting Pathfinder network consists of the items as nodes and a set of links (which may be either directed or undirected for symmetrical or non symmetrical proximity estimates) connecting pairs of the nodes. Software for Pathfinder Network Scaling is available for purchase.16
 11 http://lsi.research.telcordia.com/ 12 http://lsa.colorado.edu/ 13 http://www.cs.utk.edu/~lsi/ 14 http://www.netlib.org/svdpack/ 15 http://www.cs.utk.edu/~lsi/soft.html 16 http://www.geocities.com/interlinkinc/home.html
The essential concept underlying Pathfinder networks is pairwise similarity. Similarities can be obtained based on a subjective estimation or a numerical computation. Pathfinder provides a more accurate representation of local relationships than techniques such as MDS. The topology of a PFNET is determined by two parameters q and r and the corresponding network is denoted as PFNET(r,q). The q-parameter constrains the scope of minimum-cost paths to be considered. The r-parameter defines the Minkowski metric used for computing the distance of a path. The weight of a path with k links is determined by weights w1, w2, ..., wk of each individual link as follows:
The q-parameter specifies that triangle inequalities must be satisfied for paths with k ≤ q links:
When a PFnet satisfies the following three conditions, the distance of a path is the same as the weight of the path: 1. The distance from a document to itself is zero. 2. The proximity matrix for the documents is symmetric; thus the distance is independent of direction. 3. The triangle inequality is satisfied for all paths with up to q links. If q is set to the total number of nodes less one, then the triangle inequality is universally satisfied over the entire network. The number of links in a network can be reduced by increasing the value of the r or q parameter. The geodesic distance between two nodes in a network is the length of the minimum-cost path connecting the nodes. A minimum-cost network (MCN), PFnet(r=∞, q=n-1), has the least number of links. AuthorLink and ConceptLink17 developed by Xia Lin and colleagues enable to create interactive author co-citation analysis maps based on PFNet or Self Organizing Maps (White, Buzydlowsky, & Xia, 2000). Pathfinder Network Scaling is used in Generalized Similarity Analysis (GSA) a generic framework for structuring and visualizing distributed information resources (Chen, 1997a, 1998a, 1998b, 1999a). The original version of the framework was designed to handle a number of intrinsic interrelationships in hypertext documents, namely hypertext linkage, content similarity, and browsing patterns. GSA is based on the notion of virtual link structures to organize its structural modeling and visualization functionality. Virtual link structures are in turn determined by similarity measurements defined between a variety of entity types, for example,
 17 http://cite.cis.drexel.edu/
document-to-document similarity, author-to-author similarity, and image-to-image similarity. Not only can one extend similarity measurements to new entity-entity relationships, but one can also integrate different similarity measurements to form a new network of entities. For example, interrelationships between hypertext documents can be defined based on a combination of hypertext connectivity, word-occurrence-based similarity, and traversal-based similarity. The generic framework of GSA led to several subsequent extensions to deal with a diverse range of data, including co-citation networks and image networks. The use of Pathfinder networks in GSA reduces the excessive number of links in a typical proximity network and therefore improves the clarity of the graphical representations of such networks. The extensibility and flexibility of Pathfinder networks have been demonstrated in a series of studies along with a range of other techniques. Some recent examples include StarWalker for social navigation (Chen, Thomas, Cole, & Chennawasin, 1999), trailblazing the literature of hypertext (Chen & Carr, 1999), author co-citation analysis (Chen, 1999b), and visualizations of knowledge domains (Chen & Paul, 2001). 4.1.6 Self-Organizing Maps
One of the most profound contributions made by artificial neural networks to information visualization is the paradigm of self-organizing maps (SOMs) developed by Kohonen (Deboeck & Kohonen, 1998; Kaski, Honkela, Lagus, & Kohonen, 1998; Kohonen, 1985; Kohonen et al., 2000). During the learning phase, a self-organizing map algorithm iteratively modifies weight vectors to produce a typically 2-dimensional map in the output layer that will exhibit as best as possible the relationship of the input layer. SOM maps appear to be one of the most promising algorithms for organizing large volumes of information. However, they have some significant deficiencies, many of which are discussed in (Kohonen, 1995). These deficiencies comprise the absence of a cost function, and the lack of a theoretical basis for choosing learning rate parameter schedules and neighborhood parameters to ensure topographic ordering. There are no general proofs of convergence, and the model does not define a probability density. A Self-Organizing Map Program is available from the Kohonen Neural Networks Research Centre, Helsinki University of Technology18. SOM maps have been used to map millions of documents from over 80 Usenet newsgroups19 and to map the World-Wide Web. Xia Lin was the first to adopt the Kohonen SOM for information visualization (Lin, 1997; Lin, Soergel, & Marchionini, 1991) to document spaces. His Visual SiteMaps20 visualized clusters of important concepts drawn from a database. ET-Maps were developed in 1995 by Hsinchun Chen and his colleagues in the Artificial Intelligence (AI) Lab at the University of Arizona21. They constitute a scalable, multi-layered, graphical SOM approach to automatic categorization of large numbers of documents or web sites (Chen & Rada, 1996; Chen, Schuffels, & Orwig, 1996). The prototype was developed using the Yahoo! Entertainment sub-category (about 110,000 homepages); hence the name ET-Map.
 18 http://www.cis.hut.fi/research/som_pak/ 19 http://websom.hut.fi/websom 20 http://faculty.cis.drexel.edu/sitemap/ 21 http://ai.bpa.arizona.edu/
ET-Maps are category maps that group documents that share many noun phrase terms together in a neighborhood on a 2-D map. Each colored region represents a unique topic that contains similar documents. The size of a subject region is related to the number of documents in that category such that more important topics (if importance can be correlated to counts) occupy larger regions. Neighborhood proximity is applied to plot “subject regions” that are closely related in terms of content, close to each other on the map. ET-Maps show an “up-button” view of an information space to provide the user with a sense of the organization of the information landscape, e.g., what is where, the location of clusters and hotspots, and what is related to what. ET-Maps are multi-layer maps, with sub-maps showing greater informational resolution through a finer degree of categorization. Focus+context techniques22 have been used to display a large SOM effectively within a limited screen area (Yang, Chen, & Hong, 1999). Usability studies indicate that users tend to get lost when browsing multi-level SOM maps and continued to prefer to use a conventional text-based alphabetic hierarchy (Chen, Houston, Sewell, & Schatz, 1998). Today, ET-Maps come with two panels. The left panel is a “Windows Explorer like” interface that presents an alphabetic display of the topic hierarchy generated, while the right panel is the graphical display of the SOM output. On the left panel, a user can click on any category of interest and the system displays its subcategories beneath. At the same time, those sub-categories are also displayed on the right panel, where the spatial proximity equals the semantic proximity. In addition, colors are employed to indicate how many layers a user can go down within a certain category. A working demo of ETMaps can be explored at the AI Lab's website.23 ET-Maps and Cartographic SOM Maps are discussed further and exemplified in section 6. Multi-SOMs are a multi-maps extension of SOMs. An automatic way of naming the clusters to divide the map into logical areas, and a map generalization mechanism are introduced by (Polanco, Francois, & Lamirel, 2001), who also discuss the application potential of Multi-SOMs for visualization, exploration or browsing, and scientific and technical information analysis. 4.2 Cluster Analysis
The term cluster analysis (CA) was first used by Tryon (1939). Cluster analysis encompasses a number of different classification algorithms that aim to organize a “mountain” of information into manageable, meaningful piles, called clusters. A clustering problem can be defined by a set of objects (e.g., documents) and a vague description of a set A. The goal of clustering is to divide the object set into objects belonging to A and a second set not in A. In this clustering problem, one first needs to determine what features are relevant in describing objects in A (intra-cluster similarity) and second, what features distinguish objects in A from objects not belonging to A (inter-cluster similarity). Alternatively, a cluster problem can be formulated by a set of objects and a similarity or distance function. Here, the goal is to divide the object set into number of sub-sets (clusters) that best
 22 See section 4.4.3. 23 http://ai3.bpa.arizona.edu/ent/entertain1/
reveal the structure of the object set. These can take the form of partitions or a hierarchically organized taxonomy. Clusters should be highly internally homogenous (members are similar to one another) and highly externally heterogeneous (members are not like members of other clusters). Thus, the aim is to maximize intra-cluster similarity and minimize inter-cluster similarity. This can be formulated in terms of a utility measure that contrasts the sum of within-cluster similarities wSim by the sum of between-cluster similarities bSim: utility = wSim / (wSim + bSim). Given alternative partitions the one that shows the highest utility is selected. Clustering algorithms can be distinguished based on a number of features such as unsupervised or supervised, divisive or agglomerative, incremental or non-incremental, deterministic or nondeterministic, hierarchical or partitioning, iterative or non-iterative, single link, grouped average, or complete link clustering. Interestingly, no clustering algorithm has been shown to be particularly better than others when producing the same number of clusters (Hearst, 1999). However, experience demonstrates that some choices seem to fit some kinds of data better than others (e.g., correlation and complete linkage works very well for our ACA/JCA data) and there have been “bakeoffs” between clustering approaches (comparing single link, complete link, Ward's trace, centroid, etc.) that suggest that some approaches are more “reliable” than others for generic data sets. An excellent review of clustering algorithms can be found in (Han & Kamber, 2000). In IV, clustering techniques are frequently applied to group semantically similar objects so that object set boundaries can be presented. The automatic assignment of cluster labels is yet another topic of high relevance for information visualization. For example, work by (Pirolli, Schank, Hearst, & Diehl, 1996) automatically computes summaries of the contents of clusters of similar documents providing a method for navigating through these summaries at different levels of granularity. 4.3 Spatial Configuration
Attributes of a data set can often be cast in the form of a similarity or distance matrix. Ordination techniques such as triangulation or force directed placement take a set of documents, their similarities/distances, and parameters and generate a typically 2-dimensional layout that places similar documents closer together and dissimilar ones further apart. 4.3.1 Triangulation
Triangulation is an ordination technique that maps points from an n-dimensional space into a typically two-dimensional one (Lee, Slagle, & Blum, 1977). It starts by placing a randomly selected point at the origin of the coordinate system. Next, the most similar object is determined and the second object is placed at a specified distance from the first object. The location of the third object is defined by the distance to the subsequent two objects (triangulation). Subsequently, the notion of repulsion from the origin is used to select the quadratic solution furthest from the origin – the spatial layout grows outwards.
Compared to classical ordination methods, triangulation is computationally inexpensive. The resulting layouts exactly represent the distances between single data points but lack global optimization. Triangulation was used by Henry Small in the context of information visualization (Small, 1999b). His Map of Science is a series of nested maps showing the multi-dimensional landscape of science at five levels of aggregation. 4.3.2 Force Directed Placement
Force Directed Placement (FDP) can be used to sort randomly placed objects into a desirable layout that satisfies the given similarity relations among objects as well as aesthetics for visual presentation (symmetry, non-overlapping, minimized edge crossings, etc.) (Battista, Eades, Tamassia, & Tollis, 1994; Fruchterman & Reingold, 1991). FDP views nodes as physical bodies and edges as springs (or weighted arcs) connected to the nodes providing forces between them. Nodes move according to the forces on them until a local energy minimum is achieved. In addition to the imaginary springs, other forces can be added to the system in order to produce different effects. Many visual examples of these force models can be found in (Battista et al., 1994). The FDP method is easy to understand and implement. However, it can be very slow for large graphs – in each iteration step the forces between all nodes have to be computed and considered to optimize the spatial layout. Modifications to a traditional force-directed approach have been made in the VxInsight ordination algorithm (Davidson, Wylie, & Boyack, 2001), VxOrd, and have resulted in a dramatic increase in computational speed. VxOrd accepts pairwise scalar similarity values as the arc weights, employs barrier jumping to avoid trapping of clusters in local minima, and uses a density grid in place of pairwise repulsive forces to speed up execution. Computation times are thus order O(N) rather than O(N2). Another advantage of the VxOrd algorithm is that it determines the number and size of clusters automatically based on the data input. Plus, rather than placing objects in discrete (round) clusters, VxOrd often gives elongated or continuous structures (which look like ridges in a landscape visualization) that bridge multiple fields. The VxOrd FDP does not accommodate a continuous stream of updated data, as do some other FDP’s. Semantic Treemaps, recently proposed by (Feng & Börner, 2002), are another option to apply FDP to handle large data sets. Semantic tree maps apply clustering techniques to organize documents into clusters of semantically similar documents. Subsequently, the tree map approach (Shneiderman, 1992) is utilized to determine the size (dependent on the number of documents) and layout of clusters. Finally, FDP is applied to the documents in each cluster to place them based on their semantic similarity. By breaking the data set into smaller chunks, the computational complexity of FDP is reduced at the cost of global optimality. HyperSpace, formerly Narcissus, used FDP to visualize hyperlinks among Web pages (Hendley, Drew, Wood, & Beale, 1995). FDP has been used on small data sets by Börner (Katy Börner, 2000; Börner et al., 2000). Much larger literature (Boyack et al., 2002), patent (Boyack, Wylie,
Davidson, & Johnson, 2000), and even genomic (Kim et al., 2001) data sets have been clustered using the VxOrd FDP. 4.4 Visualization and Interaction Design
Given data objects and their spatial positions, visualizations need to be designed that can be intuitively understood and effectively and accurately explored by a human user. However, nobody should expect to understand a complex visualization in a few seconds. “The first response should be content related, not layout.” (Eduard Tufte, 1998). Different frameworks and taxonomies to characterize information visualization techniques have been proposed. Most commonly used is Ben Shneiderman’s 1996 framework characterizing IV in terms of data types and user tasks to “sort out the prototypes [that currently exist] and guide researchers to new opportunities.”. The framework defines: • Data types comprising linear, planar, volumetric, temporal, multidimensional, tree, network, and workspace.24 • Typology of Tasks such as overview, zoom, filter, details-on-demand, relate, history, and extract. • Visualizations resemble landscapes, circle plots, term plots, spotfires, starfields, etc. • Necessary features comprise interaction, navigation, detail on demand, etc. Subsequently, we review visualization as well as interaction design techniques and approaches. 4.4.1 Visualization
Visualization refers to the design of the visual appearance of data objects and their relationships. Well-designed domain visualizations: • Provide an ability to comprehend huge amounts of data on a large-scale as well as a small-scale. • Reduce visual search time (e.g., by exploiting low level visual perception). • Provide a better understanding of a complex data set (e.g., by exploiting data landscape metaphors). • Reveal relations otherwise not noticed (e.g., by exploiting perception of emergent properties). • Enable a data set to be seen from several perspectives simultaneously. • Facilitate hypothesis formulation. • Are effective sources of communication. Information visualization—the process of analyzing and transforming non-spatial data into an effective visual form—is believed to improve our interaction with large volumes of data (Card et al., 1999; Chen, 1999a; Gershon, Eick, & Card, 1998; Spence, 2000, 2001). One major key element of any successful visualization is to exploit visual perception principles. Books by Ware (2000) and Palmer (1999) provide excellent introductions to the subject. Visualizations help an increasingly diverse and potentially non-technical community to gain overviews about general patterns and trends and to discover hidden [semantic] structures. In addition, complex
 24 Added in his textbook (Shneiderman, 1997).
visualizations of different viewpoints of thousands of data objects can greatly benefit from storytelling (Gershon & Ward, 2001). Storytelling and sharing is a powerful human strategy to teach effectively, to stimulate critical and creative thinking, and to increase awareness and understanding. Last but not least, the design and presentation of meaningful visualization are an art that requires years of expertise and diverse skills. However, the visual perception, story telling, and artistic aspects of visualization design are beyond the scope of this paper. 4.4.2 Interaction Design
Interaction design refers to the implementation of techniques such as filtering, panning, zooming, distortion, etc. to efficiently search and browse large information spaces. Ben Shneiderman at the University of Maryland proposed a mantra to characterize how users interact with the visualization of a large amount of information: Overview, Zoom-in (Filter), and Details on Demand (Shneiderman, 1996). Users would start from an overview of the information space and zoom in to the part that seems to be of interest, call for more details, and so on. The term “drill down” is also used to refer to processes equivalent to the “zoom in” part of the mantra. As for where to zoom in, theories such as optimal information foraging (Pirolli & Card, 1999) appear to be a promising route to pursue. To issue meaningful queries or to exploit labeling of maps, users need a working knowledge of the subject domain vocabulary. Given the imprecise nature of human language, users frequently encounter the “vocabulary mismatch problem” (Chen et al., 1998; Deerwester et al., 1990). Although domain maps might provide searching facilities – e.g., documents matching a query are highlighted – one of their main purposes is to support browsing – i.e., the exploration of an information space in order to become familiar with it and to locate information of interest. “Browsing explores both the organization or structure of the information space and its content.” (Chen et al., 1998) It requires working knowledge of the applied knowledge organization (typically alphabetical, categorical, or hierarchical) and how to navigate in it. To ease navigation, numerous (real-world) visualization metaphors have been proposed and applied to help improve the understanding of abstract data spaces. Among them are 2-D “cartographic maps,” 2-D/3-D “category maps,” “desktop,” and 3-D “landscape” or “star field” visualizations. Paul Dourish and Matthew Chalmers identified three major navigation paradigms: spatial navigation – mimicking our experiences in the physical world; semantic navigation – driven by semantic relationships or underlying logic; and social navigation – taking advantage of the behavior of like-minded people (Dourish & Chalmers, 1994). Ideally information visualization facilitates and supports all three. 4.4.3 Focus+Context
The desire to examine large information spaces on small displays with limited resolution leads to the development of different focus and context techniques that enable users to examine local details without losing the global structure. Distortion-based techniques keep a steady overview. They enlarge some objects while simultaneously shrinking others. Ideally, the total amount of information displayed can be set flexibly and is constant even when users change their focuses of attention over several magnitudes.
Hyperbolic Trees, developed at Xerox PARC, were one of the very first focus and context techniques (Lamping, Rao, & Pirolli, 1995). Based on Poincare's model of the (hyperbolic) nonEuclidean plane, the technique assigns more display space to a portion of the hierarchy while still embedding it in the context of the entire hierarchy. A 3-D hyperbolic viewer was developed by Tamara Munzner (1997; 1998). Hyperbolic trees are very valuable to visualize hierarchical structures such as file directories, Web sites, classification hierarchies, organization hierarchies, newsgroup structures, etc. While traditional methods such as paging (dividing data into several pages and displaying one page at a time), zooming, or panning show only part of the information at certain granularity, hyperbolic trees show detail and context at once. Although hyperbolic trees have not been used to visualize knowledge domains, they are commonly used with patent trees, and might be well suited to visualization of other hierarchical data. Fisheye views developed by George Furnas (1986) show a distorted view of a data set in an attempt to show local detail while maintaining global context. They mimic the effect of a widerange fisheye camera that shows the whole world, but have higher magnification in the focus center and shrink objects in relation to their distance to the center of focus. Two transformation options can be applied to the fisheye view: Cartesian and polar. For Cartesian transformation, all the regions are rectangular. Polar transformation regions can be arbitrarily shaped. The technique was improved by Sarkar and Brown (1994) with respect to layout considerations. Fisheye views have also been applied to improve ET-maps (Yang et al., 1999). Fractal views, based on Mandelbrot’s fractal theory (1988), were first applied to the design of information displays by Hideki Koike (1993). They can be utilized to abstract displayed objects and to control the amount of displayed information based on semantic relevance by removing less important information automatically25. The fractal dimension, a measure of complexity, is used to control the total number of displayed nodes. Fractal Views have been applied to visualize huge hierarchies (Koike & Yoshihara, 1993) and to control the amount of information displayed in ET-Maps (Yang et al., 1999). Semantic zoom was also introduced by Furnas, and provides multiple levels of resolution. The view changes depending on the “distance” the viewer is from the objects. Semantic zoom was implemented in MuSE – Multiscale editor (Furnas & Zhang, 1998). It was also used in the Galaxy of News system that visualizes large quantities of independently authored pieces of information such as news stories (Rennison, 1994). Zoomable user interfaces, also called ZUIs, incorporate zooming as a fundamental aspect of their design. They place documents at absolute positions within a large zoomable space.
 25 A linear clustering algorithm that groups objects according to the effects they have on the fractal dimension of the clusters was proposed in (Barbará & Chen, 2000).
Combined with animated navigation, this helps to give users a sense of structure and of where they are within a large information space. Pad++ is an environment for exploring zooming techniques for interfaces (Bederson et al., 1996). Jazz is a Java 2 toolkit (http://www.cs.umd.edu/hcil/jazz/) developed by Ben Bederson and his colleagues at the University of Maryland. It supports the development of 2D structured graphics programs in general, and ZUIs in particular. 4.5 Discussion
Technique Scalability Computation costs Interpret. Dim Layout Optimality scale
Eigenvalue high high often static global FA/PCA limited medium often static global MDS limited medium often static global LSA high high no global PFNet medium medium no static Local or global - depends on parameter setting SOM high high no static global Triangulation medium medium -static local FDP limited high -dynamic local One exception to Table 1 is noted here. Although VxOrd is classified as a FDP algorithm, it does not act like FDPs as characterized in the table. Rather, it can scale to very large data sets (millions of similarity pairs, only limited by memory constraints), has very fast run times, and provides a static layout. Some ordination techniques have a very high computational complexity for large data sets. This complexity can be reduced at the cost of global optimality by breaking the data set into smaller chunks, ordinating each cluster, and compiling all clusters into a single map. Incrementally updated visualizations of domains based on incremental data updates, or perhaps continually updated visualizations based on sequential streaming of previously extracted data are very desirable for domain analysis see section 7 on Promising Avenues of Research. However, few current techniques (only some FDPs) can accommodate this type of data.
 26 Most data analysis techniques are computationally expensive and are applied in a batch job. During run time the results of the data-mining step are used to interactively visualize a data set under a certain point of view.

5 THE ARIST DATA SET

5.1 Data Retrieval
To demonstrate the literature mapping process and to show the different measurements, layout routines, and visualization metaphors that may be used to visualize a knowledge domain in action, we have developed a data set – named ARIST data set - consistent with the subject of this chapter. First, data were retrieved from the Science Citation Index (SCI) and Social Science Citation Index (SSCI) by querying the titles, abstracts, and terms (ISI keywords and keywords plus) fields for the years 1977-July 27, 2001. Query terms and the number of records retrieved for each query are shown in Table 2.
SEARCH TERM Number Topic Citation Analysis: citation analysis 596 cocitation OR co-citation 177 co-occurrence AND (term OR word) 77 co-term OR co-word 52 science map[ping] OR mapping science OR map[ping] of science 32 Topic Semantics: semantic analysis OR semantic index OR semantic map 331 Topic Bibliometrics: bibliometric 818 scientometric 327 Topic Visualization: data visualization OR visualization of data 275 information visualization OR visualization of information 113 scientific visualization 268 Search terms included terms relevant to citation analysis, semantics, bibliometrics, and visualization to allow overlaps between those terms and fields to be shown. These four fields will be referred to extensively in the domain analyses of section 6. Of the 2764 unique articles retrieved, 287 were retrieved by more than one of the query terms. 5.2 Coverage
It is extremely important to choose an appropriate data source for retrieval, one whose data are likely to provide answers to the questions one wishes to answer using domain visualization. As an example, we discuss some limitations associated with the data for our ARIST data set. Numbers of articles retrieved by year are shown in Figure 2 for two categories: articles with terms (ISI keywords) and articles without terms. As is well known, ISI’s databases did not include either abstracts or terms prior to 1991. Thus, any maps based on either abstract text or terms will naturally exclude any articles prior to 1991. In addition, as shown in Figure 2, terms are available for only 71% of the articles published since 1991. (The lack of terms can be due to
several things; for instance, the journal may not require index terms from the authors, the journal may not supply terms to the database vendor, or the database vendor may choose not to index an article.) This makes the use of terms a less-than-optimum basis for mapping of these data. By contrast, abstracts are available for 84% of the post-1991 ARIST data set, making it a richer source of information. The percentages listed here apply only to this data set; we do not know the
1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000
overall percentages of ISI records containing abstracts or terms. Book, journal and/or conference coverage can also be an issue. For instance, JASIS(T), Scientometrics, Journal of Information Science, Information Processing and Management, and the Journal of Documentation are key sources for visualization of science or knowledge domains (see Table 3). Yet the SCI only started coverage of these journals in the mid-1990s. (JASIS, Scientometrics, and JDoc were covered through the mid-1980s.) Queries to the SCI alone would not have provided sufficient coverage of the intended fields over this time period due to this lack of key journal coverage. Thus, we queried the SSCI as well, which covered those journals over the entire time period under investigation. Users of ISI’s Web of Science can conduct a search across all databases such as the SCI, SSCI, and the Arts and Humanities Citation Index (AHCI).
Journal Categories # Papers Scientometrics LIS, CS 482 JASIS(T) LIS, CS 139 Journal of Information Science LIS, CS Information Processing & Management LIS, CS Lecture Notes in Computer Science CS Research Policy Other Journal of Documentation LIS, CS Current Contents Other Computers & Graphics CS IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics CS Bulletin of the Medical Library Association LIS IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications CS Medicina Clinica Other Library & Information Science Research LIS Social Studies of Science Other Computer CS Computer Graphics Forum CS Libri LIS Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence CS Future Generation Computer Systems CS International Forum on Information and Documentation LIS Landscape and Urban Planning Other Proceedings of the American Society For Information Science LIS Proceedings of the ASIS Annual Meeting LIS, CS Nachrichten Fur Dokumentation LIS Library Trends LIS Library Quarterly LIS Science Technology & Human Values Other Scientist LIS Library and Information Science LIS Omega-International Journal of Management Science Other Computers & Geosciences CS Zentralblatt Fur Bibliothekswesen LIS Table 3 also shows that the data were dominated by journals jointly classified in the Library & Information Science (LIS) and Computer Science (CS) categories. Journals classified as “Other” in Table 3 come from a variety of categories, and suggest that the fields covered by our original queries are accessed by many other disciplines. For completeness, we include a distribution of the number of articles per field per year, along with average citation counts, for the ARIST data set (see Figure 3). This shows the dramatic increase in publishing in citation analysis and bibliometrics starting in the late 1980s, and the birth of the visualization field around the same time. It also shows that citation analysis articles were more highly cited that bibliometrics articles in the 1970s and 1980s, and that citation counts for all four fields have generally dropped throughout the 1990s. The most recent articles have, of course, been cited infrequently due to their young age.
Average citations per paper
1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000
1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000
Data coverage issues also raise other questions such as: • Does lack of appropriate coverage cause significant distortions of domain visualizations? • If so, to what extent are the levels of quality of the final domain visualization and the analysis results undermined? • Are there ways to compensate for missing data? We have no ready answers to these questions, but suggest that they are important topics for discussion and further research. 6 THE STRUCTURE OF THE SUBJECT DOMAIN
As described in section 4, there are many mapping techniques available to work side by side on the same data and produce images of a domain from different perspectives. This allows us to stitch different pictures into a bigger one, which will reveal more insights about a domain than use of just a single technique. Multiple tools enhance the utility of domain visualization. 6.1 Multiple Maps of the Domain
The overall organization of the field of domain visualization (the overall subject of the ARIST data set) takes advantages of several emerging techniques. These techniques make it possible not only to decompose the domain according to a range of quantitative measures, but also to compare and contrast different pictures of the same domain. For example, in GSA and Starwalker, the use of factor analysis allows us to break down a domain network into components. A long recognized advantage of using factor analysis over traditional clustering techniques is that factor analysis does not force us to classify one object
into one cluster or the other; instead, it preserves an important type of phenomenon: truly important work is often universal. In SOM, the overall structure is depicted in forms of adjacent regions. Therefore, matches and mismatches between various versions of the domain maps will provide insights. VxInsight uses a landscape metaphor and portrays the structure of a literature space as mountain ridges of document clusters. The size of a cluster and its relative position in the layout provide valuable clues to the role of the cluster in the overall structure. Many different snapshots of the ARIST domain are explained in the remainder of this section. 6.1.1 ARIST-GSA/StarWalker
We generated an author co-citation analysis (ACA) map and a document co-citation analysis (DCA) map based on the ARIST data set using the four-step procedure described in (Chen & Paul, 2001). Data Preparation First, we selected authors whose work has received citations above a determined threshold for the author co-citation visualization. This selection was on the first-author only basis due to the availability of the information.27 Documents were selected similarly for the document co-citation visualization. The threshold parameter can be increased or decreased to control the number of authors or documents to be analyzed. Conventionally, the author citation threshold is set to 10. The intellectual groupings of these authors provide snapshots of the underlying knowledge domain. We computed the co-citation frequencies for these authors from a citation database, such as ISI’s SCI or SSCI. ACA uses a matrix of co-citation frequencies to compute a correlation matrix of Pearson correlation coefficients. Some researchers believe that such correlation coefficients best capture an author’s citation profile. Author Co-citation Analysis Second, we applied Pathfinder network scaling to the network that the correlation matrix defines. Although factor analysis is a standard ACA practice in traditional author co-citation analysis, MDS and factor analysis rarely appear in the same graphical representations. We then overlay the intellectual groupings that factor analysis identifies and the interconnectivity structure of a Pathfinder network. Authors with similar colors essentially belong to the same specialty and should appear as a closely connected group in the network. Therefore, we can expect to see the two perspectives converge in the visualization. Finally, we display the citation impact of each author atop the intellectual groupings. The height of a citation bar—which consists of a stack of color-coded annual citation sections—represents the magnitude of the impact. Sample author co-citation analysis maps are displayed in Figure 4 and Figure 5. The factor analysis identified 10 factors whose eigenvalues are greater than one. These factors explain 90% of variance in the data. Each factor corresponds to a specialty in domain
 27 This way of gathering data has the effect of privileging sole or first authors. Researchers who publish frequently in non-first author positions are thus not included even though they should be. Research has shown that first-author citation studies distort the picture in terms of most influential researchers. All-author citation counts should be preferred when visualizing the structure of research fields. The subfield structure tends to be just about the same for both methods (Persson, 2001; van Dalen & Henkens, 2001).
visualization. The largest three factors cumulatively explain 63% of variance. The following four specialties can be identified in the map, although the Pathfinder structure and the overlay factor analysis color scheme did not converge in this case – the sign of a heterogeneous subject domain: • mapping science: fundamentals, • social studies of science, • bibliometrics: quantitative analysis and evaluation, and • scholarly communication and co-citation analysis. The top-three specialties correspond to color-coded factors in the map: mapping science in red, social studies of science in green, and bibliometrics in blue. Remaining specialties are likely to be a combination of all the colors, and readers can cross-reference between factor analysis results and the map. The resultant author co-citation map contains 380 authors who have nine or more citations over the entire period between 1977 and 2001. Pathfinder network scaling limited the number of “salient” connections among these authors to 384. As usual, each author's node is colored by the factor loadings in the largest three specialties. An author co-citation map of a focused, coherent subject domain should demonstrate a considerable degree of conformance between the Pathfinder network structure and the factor analysis color patterns. However, this is not the case here, suggesting that science mapping constitutes a number of largely independent disciplines as (Leydesdorff & Wouters, 2000) describes the status of scientometrics - this is preparadigmatic.
It is interesting to note that none of the four largest factors are centered in either visualization or semantics, which were two of the four groups comprising the ARIST data set. These two fields are relatively new and are not highly cited (see Figure 3). Thus, they are unlikely to be strong factors in an ACA-type analysis. Document Co-citation Analysis Given the flexibility of GSA, we also generated a document co-citation map based on the top sliced set of documents (see Figure 6 and Figure 7). As expected, there are as many as 15 factors of which eigenvalues are greater than one. These 15 factors cumulatively explained 90% of variance in the ARIST data. The largest four factors explained 56%. The following four specialties are relatively easy to identify in the map, corresponding to the largest four factors respectively: • mapping science: fundamentals, • social studies of science, • bibliometrics: quantitative analysis and evaluation, and • scholarly communication and co-citation analysis. As with the author co-citation maps, the top-three specialties in document co-citation maps also correspond to color-coded factors in the map: mapping science in red, social studies of science in green, and bibliometrics in blue. Remaining specialties are likely to be a combination of all the colors, and readers can cross-reference between factor analysis results and the map.

6.1.2 ARIST-ET-Map
Bin Zhu and Hsinchun Chen of the University of Arizona visualized the ARIST data set using ET-Maps (see section 4.3.2). They trained 10*10 nodes using the ID/keyword data of the ARIST data set. At the end of the map creation process, each node is associated with a list of documents that are semantically similar to each other. In addition, a phrase was assigned to each node as its label and adjacent nodes that have the same label are grouped into one region or category. Thus, spatial proximity on the map indicates semantic proximity, meaning if two categories are close to each other on SOM map, they are also semantically similar to each other. A screenshot of the resulting ET-Map utilizing different visual encasings is shown in Figure 9. The top-level map shows 14 subject regions represented by regularly shaped tiles. Each tile is a visual summary of a group of documents with similar keywords. The tiles are shaded in different colors to differentiate them, while labels identify the subject of the tile. The subjects are also
listed on the left hand side together with a number in brackets telling how many individual documents it contains. In a typical browsing session a user would get an overview first, zoom into areas of interest, and access a particular document. Alternatively, a user can select a category of interest and the interface will display documents within that category.
Note that subject area citation analysis appears to be much larger than information visualization even though the citation analysis area has fewer documents. The size of the subject area is not necessarily related to the number of documents in an ET-map, but rather it denotes the amount of space between areas based on the number of nodes used to generate the map (see Figure 14b in section 6.2). 6.1.3 ARIST-Cartographic-SOM Maps
André Skupin, a geographer at the University of New Orleans, uses SOMs to generate domain visualizations in a cartographic fashion (Skupin, 2000; Skupin & Buttenfield, 1996). He used SOM_PAK to train a SOM (see section 4.3.2) based on the ID/keyword list of the ARIST data set and ArcGIS to generate the visualization. Labeling of clusters was done automatically within ArcGIS based on rules that were given to it regarding the link between attributes and label characteristics.
The map shown in Figure 10 aims at facilitating the use of the same skills traditionally associated with geographic maps. The underlying SOM consists of 2200 neurons (i.e. 40x55 nodes).28 A hierarchical clustering tree was computed for these neurons in order to allow scale-dependent exploration of the data set in a zoomable interface. In this particular visualization, only the 25cluster solution is shown. For each cluster, three label terms are computed, to better convey cluster content. Since the clusters were computed from the SOM itself, these labels indicate the potential topic or theme that one would expect to find with articles assigned to a particular cluster. In order to show the relative prominence of topics in the data set, the clusters were ranked according to the number of articles of this data set that were actually assigned to them. Clusters containing more articles appear larger and more prominent.
The terrain visualization expresses the degree to which the three highest-ranked components of each neuron dominate the neurons n-dimensional term vector. The purpose of this is to allow some judgment regarding the relative merits of the clustering solution that is overlaid. Higher elevation—i.e., percentage—indicates a very organized, focused, and coherent portion of the information space. These areas tend to be recognized and preserved by the cluster routine, which shows up nicely in this map. On the other extreme, there is the low-lying area, especially at the bottom right of the map. This indicates a lack of strong organization, a lack of distinct themes that would be recognized by the clustering routine. What is important here is that this does not  28 Thus, SOMs use a raster data model instead of a vector data model.
mean that there is necessarily a lack of “meaning” to this area. Rather, clusters containing it should be interpreted more cautiously. In this case, the main reason for the lack of organization is that most of the articles with 1-2 keywords are congregated here. In the 25-cluster solution this area is contained in a cluster whose labels (“Volume-Rendering” – “Information-Retrieval” – “Impact”) indicate a lack of coherence. Labels for this cluster are scaled correctly, but deemphasized by using a gray font color. The clustering solution and terrain visualization also indicate areas of transition and overlaps between different major topics. For example, note the cluster labeled “Information-Visualization” – “Pattern” – “Science” that is located between the larger clusters that are dominated by “Information Visualization” and “Science.” Various ways in which cartographic techniques could be used to improve information visualization are discussed in (Skupin, 2000) see also section 7. 6.1.4 ARIST-VxInsight
Sandia’s VxInsight was used to generate a number of document-based views of the ARIST data set using several different similarity functions. Four separate maps were created, all using the VxOrd FDP algorithm: 1. A citation-based map using direct and co-citation linkages after the combined linkage method of Small (1997) using a direct:cocitation weighting factor of 20:1. Four different time segments are shown in Figure 11. 2. A co-term map based on a cosine similarity using the ISI keywords (see Figure 12, left). 3. A map based on LSA over words extracted from the titles of articles. LSA was performed using SVDPACK (see section 4.1.2) to generate a document-bydocument similarity matrix. Only similarity values > 0.9 were used in the VxOrd FDP to generate the map shown in Figure 12, right. 4. A co-classification map based a cosine similarity from the ISI journal classifications for each article (see Figure 13). In all three figures we used the following color scheme to indicate the various query terms that have been used to retrieve articles: white for citation analysis, co-citation, co-word, etc.; green for bibliometrics and scientometrics; blue for semantics; and magenta for visualization. Articles that match multiple query terms show multiple color markers. A quick perusal of the landscapes in Figure 11-Figure 13 shows that each reveals different information about the domain. The citation-based map in Figure 11 shows the relationship between the four fields for four different time segments. It is very easy to see the growth in the four fields – citation analysis, bibliometrics, semantics, and visualization – from a comparison of the figures. Citation analysis and bibliometrics (white and green dots) both have roughly equal numbers of papers during the first time segment (1977-82). More detailed analysis reveals that citation analysis was stronger in the late 1970s with bibliometrics picking up steam in the early 1980s. The second segment (1983-88) shows bibliometrics as the larger field with some well defined clusters near the top of the map (labeled A). The semantics and visualization fields have not yet appeared (see Figure 3 as well). The third segment (1989-94) shows the formation of the
visualization field in three clusters (labeled B). The fact that these visualization clusters are formed at the edges of a citation map indicates that they are not well linked to the main body of citation and bibliometric work in the center of the map. Pictures showing the citation links (not shown here) confirm this and the fact that the visualization papers are not as highly cited as the citation and bibliometrics papers. This may be due to their relatively young age or perhaps may indicate that visualization researchers tend to cite other work less frequently. The fourth segment (1995-2000) shows semantic analysis as a new field (labeled C), which, like the visualization clusters, is not well linked to the main body of work. The citation analysis and bibliometrics fields each seem to be well defined, with some mixing of the two in certain clusters. While bibliometrics seemed to be growing faster than citation analysis in the middle two segments (late 80s and early 90s), comparison of the numbers of papers in the late 90s shows citation analysis to be gaining strength. There is also an interesting cluster (labeled D) in which citation analysis, bibliometrics, and visualization are mixed. Additional analysis on this and surrounding clusters will be given in section 6.2 (see Figure 14).
The co-classification map in Figure 13 gives completely different information about the domain. This type of map has use in that one can clearly see the fields in which various groups of articles were published. The large peak with white and green dots (labeled A) is dominated by information and library sciences, which is where one would expect citation analysis and bibliometrics articles to be published. However, the white/green combination is also found in peaks comprised mainly of planning and development journals (labeled B), and general medicine (labeled C). Interestingly, a peak comprised mainly of articles in neuroscience-related journals (labeled D) contains articles from all four main areas of the ARIST data.
Note that the VxInsight tool is not just a way to take pictures of a domain visualization, but is a dynamic tool with which one can browse the information. Zoom, rotation, dynamic labeling (updated at each zoom step) based on different attributes such as titles, terms, etc., showing of citation or other linkages, filtering by date, detail on demand for individual articles, the ability to import different layouts, and a query facility are all features that enable a highly interactive exploration of the information space. 6.2 Comparison of Maps
The layouts of different [document] maps – Cartographic SOM map, ET map, VxInsight co-term map and LSA map – based on terms or words are compared here. Three of the maps were generated from an ID/term list, as shown in Table 4, and one was generated from LSA on article titles using VxOrd. Information about the citation map is also given in Table 4 for completeness. Numbers of articles appearing in each map, along with the number of ID/term pairs, citations, and/or similarity pairs (where known) used to generate the map, are also provided. There are some issues around using terms to generate domain maps, two of which we address here. First is the distinction between the use of words (single words), compound terms (typically noun phrases parsed from titles or abstracts and consisting of multiple words), and specific terms (terms as they appear in lists from bibliographic sources). In this analysis, we have used specific terms, which can be either single words or multi-word phrases. For instance, in the ARIST data, the terms SCIENTOMETRICS, SCIENTOMETRIC INDICATORS, and STATIONARY SCIENTOMETRIC INDICATORS all occur multiple times. Multi-word terms tend to be more specific, and thus might be expected to produce clusters based on specifics. Parsing to single
words from the small number of specific compound terms is an option that leads to a large number of more general terms that can be used to index documents.
A: Carto-SOM B: ET-map C: Co-term D: LSA Citation Basis id/term id/term cosine id/title words direct/cocite Years 1991-2001 1991-2001 1991-2001 1977-2001 1977-2001 # papers 1446 1286 1446 2702 1626 # ID/term pairs 5202 5202 5202 # citations 4632 # sim pairs 72664 48435 18258 A second issue concerns the number of terms associated with each article. For the ARIST data, 34% of the articles with terms have 1-3 terms, 42% of the articles have 4-7 terms, 17% of the articles have 8-10 terms, and the remaining 7% have 11 or more terms. Chung and Lee (Chung & Lee, 2001) showed that cosine measures tend to emphasize high-frequency terms. Andre Skupin’s experience (see section 6.1.3) with SOM is that articles with only 1 or 2 terms tend to either congregate in less dense areas of the SOM or in the middle of clusters, rather than at their edges.29 Boyack’s experience using a cosine co-term similarity with FDP is that articles with only 1 or 2 terms tend to be evenly distributed if the associated terms are specific, multi-word terms, but lie in the middle of large clusters if the associated terms are single word, general terms (e.g, SCIENCE).30 Different results may arise from different layout routines; nevertheless, a definitive study on the effects of term types, the generality of terms, and term distributions is needed. The term-based maps all show only a portion (around 50%) of the 2767 articles in the ARIST set. This is due to the lack of keywords for papers published prior to 1991, and to the lack of terms on 26% of the papers published since 1991. A total of 872 unique terms occurred more than once in the list of 5202 id/term pairs. The citation map retained a few more papers (1626), but missed 1141 others because there were no citation links between them and any other member of the set. The LSA map, if the entire document-by-document were used (3.83 million similarity values above the matrix diagonal), would have retained all 2767 articles. However, due to the size of the matrix, only similarities of 0.9 or greater were used in ordination, and thus 65 articles were not retained in the map. Figure 14 compares the layouts of the four term or word based maps. There is much that is similar between these four layouts. In all four, citation analysis and bibliometrics (yellow and green dots) are found together, while visualization (magenta) and semantics (blue) are mostly by themselves. There are some areas in each map with some overlap between semantics and visualization, and some very small regions with overlap between all four areas. Thus, at a macro
 29 Personal communication. 30 Unpublished data.
level, the different layout techniques seem to give similar groupings from the term or word expressions. We have not done a neighborhood analysis to verify this statistically, but leave that to another time and study.
perhaps fewer clusters and less efficient space-filling can be justified. The LSA map is not compared here since title words and terms give different levels of information (Qin, 2000).
We now provide a comparison of reference-based citation maps with maps based on similarities between terms or words. The area around cluster D of Figure 11 seemed to be of interest due to the overlap between citation analysis, bibliometrics, and visualization. Browsing of that cluster showed that the visualization papers were all related to visualization of neural networks, and that they appeared in that cluster with a large number of citation and bibliometrics studies on decision-support systems. Browsing near the cluster also revealed that different types of citation analysis seemed to be clustered by analysis type. The first panel of Figure 16 (citation map) shows the results of three queries to abstracts: author co-citation, co-word, and co-citation [NOT author co-citation]. The results of those queries lie in the clusters labeled A, B, and C, respectively, with very little scatter. Indeed the citation map portion of Figure 16 shows only a small portion of the overall citation map (compare Figure 11).
Browsing of individual articles confirmed that each cluster was comprised of articles where researchers used the technique central to the cluster. Identical queries were made to the Cartographic-SOM, co-term, and LSA maps, with the results shown in Figure 16. In these three maps, the query results are spread throughout the maps and are not associated with any discrete clusters. Thus, articles are clustered much better by technique when using references than when using term or title-based similarity measures. This is likely due to lack of consistent use of terms corresponding to techniques in either keyword lists or titles. We expect that maps based on similarities between words in abstracts would do a much better job of clustering by technique than do any of the measures shown here.
The analysis and layout comparisons presented here do not show that any one type of similarity method and layout are better than any other for producing domain visualizations. Rather, they show that trade-offs are involved and that the researcher should use the combination of similarity and layout techniques that are likely to aid in answering the questions at hand. Each researcher will, of course, have his or her favorite methods. We encourage all who are involved in domain visualization to broaden their horizons and expand the suite of methods that they use, to the
benefit of all who read and rely upon their work. Note also that this survey is largely derived from a quantitative approach. It is also important to take into account qualitative views. 7 PROMISING AVENUES OF RESEARCH
While working on this chapter the authors discussed a large and diverse number of potential ways to improve the generation of domain visualizations and their interpretation. In particular, we find the following to be of great interest: • Ways to increase the accessibility of domain visualizations for non-experts. • Utilizing domain visualization to help answer real-world questions. • Bringing together leading researchers in different fields that contribute to the visualization of knowledge domains to improve the dissemination of results. • Development of more robust, scalable algorithms. Promising avenues of research that address those interests are discussed below. Increasing the accessibility of domain visualizations for non-experts. Despite advances in visualization research, many non-expert users find the use of visualization tools to be unfamiliar and non-intuitive. Domain visualizations could greatly benefit from the incorporation of advanced visual perception (Ware, 2000); (Palmer, 1999) and cognitive principles into tools to aid the non-expert. In addition, it seems to be desirable and advantageous to compare existing and novel algorithms on existing data sets and to contrast the results with human data, see (K. Börner, 2000) for first results. Ultimately, visualizations that best fit cognitive user models will be easier to understand and use. Cartographic design considerations and specific techniques can enrich the design of domain visualizations in a number of ways. The value of using a geographic metaphor was first discussed in (Wise et al., 1995). Today, several geographers are involved in extending past work on geographic metaphors and primitives (Couclelis, 1998; Golledge, 1995) towards the development and testing of specific interfaces for spatialized browsing of non-geographic information (Fabrikant, 2000; Fabrikant & Buttenfield, 2001; Skupin & Buttenfield, 1996). Cartographic perspectives on information visualization are presented in (Skupin, 2000). The relevance of data structures and analytical tools common in geographic information systems is being investigated in (Skupin, 2001). Utilizing domain visualization to help answer real-world questions. We believe that visualizations of knowledge domains can help to assess scientific frontiers, to forecast research vitality, to identify disruptive events/technologies/changes, and to find knowledge carriers, etc. For example, (Schwechheimer & Winterhager, 1999, 2001) applied a co-citation analysis based method to identify and analyze highly dynamic, rapidly developing research fronts of climate research. They used journal profiles, co-citation maps, and actor profiles as information elements. Results by Nederhof and Noyons (1992) indicate that bibliometric assessment of research performance is potentially useful in humanities disciplines. Much of the work done with VxInsight has been for competitive intelligence purposes (Boyack et al., 2002). Multi-SOM maps have been proposed for a knowledge-oriented analysis on science and technology via knowledge indicators (Polanco et al., 2001).
New commercial applications are also being aimed at domain analysis. VantagePoint31 reads bibliographic data files from many different sources and automates such techniques as crosscorrelation analyses and factor analyses for purposes of technology assessment and opportunities analysis. Other products, such as SemioMap32 or Knowledgist33, use linguistic techniques, semantic analysis, Bayesian models, or ontologies to understand the content of unstructured textual sources, whether in local files or on the Internet. These products seek to replace the “hunt-and-peck” method of keyword search by the ability to browse the entire search space for relevant documents. Internet Cartographer34 is Inventix Software’s solution to information overload on the Internet. It combines advanced artificial intelligence techniques with sophisticated information visualization techniques to build maps of accessed documents, organized in a hierarchy of over 500 pre-defined categories. Recent work on so called “small world graphs” aiming at a graph theoretical analysis of the Web may turn out to be applicable to analyze and visualize bibliographic data and research networks as well. Work by Jon Kleinberg at Cornell University, and Prabhakar Raghavan and Sridhar Rajagopalan at IBM Almaden Research Center on “hubs” (documents which cite many other documents) and “authorities” (documents which are highly cited) (Kleinberg, 1999) could be used to identify excellent review articles and high quality papers respectively. It may also lead to improved measures to identify emerging research themes and communities based on authors of documents sharing some common theme. Bringing together leading researchers. We believe that research on visualizing knowledge domains could be sped up considerably if one or two well-understood and expert-verified domain analysis data sets, e.g. in the form of a TREC data set35, were made available for general use to rate different algorithms and visualization techniques. In addition, a centralized repository of data analysis and visualization software applicable to create domain visualizations would improve the dissemination of algorithmic knowledge, enable comparisons of algorithms, and save the time spent for re-implementing algorithms (Börner & Zhou, 2001). Assuming that ownership and privacy issues can be resolved, we believe that a data set and software repository would also boost creativity by easing access to existing work; consultation with others working on related topics; implementation of new (commercial) applications, which, in turn challenge the development and improvement of the algorithms; exploration of new ideas; and, last but not least, the dissemination of results to science (Shneiderman, 2000). The design of collaborative information visualizations that can be explored by multiple, potentially distributed users at the same time is also expected to improve collaborative data collection, access, examination, and management. Development of more robust, scalable algorithms. More robust semantic similarity measures and highly scalable ordination techniques are needed. Most current similarity generation and layout algorithms require hours or more to produce results. This has not been a deterrent to
 31 http://www.thevantagepoint.com/ and http://tpac.gatech.edu/ 32 http://www.semio.com/ 33 http://www.invention-machine.com/ 34 http://www.inventix.com/ 35 http://trec.nist.gov/data.html
domain researchers who spend a great deal of time analyzing the results of domain maps, but will prove a deterrent to a future generation of users who want quick answers from small literature sets (500 or fewer articles) that they can download in real-time. Examples of this new generation of systems are AuthorLink and ConceptLink36 by Xia Lin and colleagues, JAIR Space37 by Mark Foltz, or Star Walker38 by Chaomei Chen. Layout algorithms that give robust answers are also needed. By robust answers, we mean a layout that does not change significantly with slight or even modest perturbations to the input. Recent work by Davidson (Davidson et al., 2001) using VxOrd showed that some clusters will break up with the introduction of small amounts of noise (random changes to similarities of 2% or less), while other clusters retain their structure with the addition of large amounts of noise (order 10%). In cases where robustness cannot be achieved, analysis to quantify the robustness of individual clusters can be done to aid researchers in knowing how much confidence to place in their results. In the same way that the Web continually sprouts new pages, there is also a steady stream of new work in the scientific literature. Hence, research by Barabasi and his colleagues (Barabási & Albert, 1999; Barabási, Albert, & Jeong, 2000) on the development of algorithms that mimic the growth of the Web may be able to model the growth of scientific disciplines as well. Work on incremental ordination and layout algorithms is essential to visualize continually changing data. One advantageous feature of such algorithms is that they enable incremental update while preserving the main topology of the layout. Organic information design was first proposed by (Mackinlay, Rao, & Card, 1995) and applied recently by (Fry, 2000). It borrows ideas like growth, atrophy, responsiveness, homeostasis, and metabolism, and it applies them to design information visualization that one “can 'feed' data to, and watch how the data is digested.” (Dodge, 2001). Generative Topographic Mapping (GTM) (Bishop, Svensen, & Williams, 1998) is an alternative to SOMs in that it generates topographic maps. The model was developed at the Neural Computing Research Group, Aston University, UK39 and is a novel form of latent variable modeling, which allows general non-linear transformations from latent space to data space. For the purposes of data visualization, the mapping is then inverted using Bayes’ theorem, resulting in a posterior distribution in latent space. GTPs overcome most limitations of the self-organizing maps and might turn out to be a valuable method for the visualization of knowledge domains. The genomics and bioinformatics world has been the home to many algorithmic innovations in recent years, many of which could be applied to data analysis, clustering, and visualization. Research focus is on matching algorithms, scalability of clustering methods, effectiveness of methods for clustering complex shapes and types of data, high-dimensional clustering techniques, and methods for clustering mixed numerical and categorical data in large databases. Continuing research into eigenvector and matrix techniques, and parallel algorithms may also lead to advances in information science.
 36 http://cite.cis.drexel.edu/ 37 http://www.infoarch.ai.mit.edu/jair/ 38 http://www.brunel.ac.uk/~cssrccc2/ 39 Papers, reports, software, demos etc. are available at http://www.ncrg.aston.ac.uk/GTM/
In the 1960s and early 1970s Belver Griffith applied bibliometrics and behavioral measures to reveal disciplinary communication structures. Recent work by Sandstrom (2001) shows that universal principles such as prey-choice models from optimal foraging theory – developed by biologists in the 1970s – can be successfully applied in the bibliographic microhabitat to explain information seeking and use behavior. Sandstrom (1994) was among the very first to see scholars as subsistence foragers in a socioecological framework. Research by Pirolli and Card (1999) supports the claim that foraging theory can be extended to understand information foraging and the evolution of knowledge domains, and to improve their visualizations. Lastly we agree with Hjorland & Albrechtsen (1995) that information science in general and the visualization of knowledge domain in particular should be seen as a social rather than purely mental research area. This new view stresses the social, ecological, and purpose-oriented production and usage of knowledge. 8 CONCLUSIONS
Thank you for joining us on a long journey about the visualization of knowledge domains. We’ve gone through some history, the general process of generating domain maps, commonly used units and measures, specific techniques, and the application of several techniques to generate and compare diverse maps of the subject domain. Guided through these maps you learned that this research field is currently divided into a few major islands, some of which – e.g., information visualization and semantics islands – are isolated. However, there are some interesting connecting points that should be exploited in future work. We hope that our survey provides a starting point for researchers and practitioners to appreciate the richness and complexity of this fast evolving research field, to determine their own positions, to identify related work in other research areas, and to plan (interdisciplinary) collaborations and future work on promising applications. We believe that research aimed at visualizing knowledge domains can benefit from importing and incorporating research in other fields as identified in section 7 to vastly improve the readability and effectiveness of domain visualizations. It can also contribute to the development of science in general by exporting methods and approaches to identify related work by experts in relevant research areas, assess research vitality, identify evolving research fields, etc. We hope that the various snapshots and our interpretations of this dynamic and interdisciplinary field of study produced in this grand tour can lead to insights into the essence of the field as a whole and its promising future. 9 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The composition of a review article in today’s flood of information can only be done in the middle of a tightly knit network of domain experts and colleagues supporting and connecting it to relevant research. We greatly appreciate the time and effort Bin Zhu, Hsinchun Chen, and André Skupin put into the generation, discussion and comparison of the ET-Map and
Cartographic SOM map. The section on SOM maps benefited from André Skupin’s detailed feedback. We wish to thank Katherine W. McCain, Blaise Cronin, Henry Small, Pamela Sandstrom, and the anonymous reviewers for their very insightful comments. Ben Shneiderman and Alan Porter commented on an earlier version of this chapter. We gratefully acknowledge support for this work by The Council for Museums Archives and Libraries in the UK (RE/089), Laboratory Directed Research and Development, Sandia National Laboratories, U.S. Department of Energy (DE-AC04-94AL85000), and an NIH/NIA demonstration fund for Mapping Aging Research. 10 BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ballay, J. M. (1994). Designing Workscape: An interdisciplinary experience. Paper presented at the CHI'94 Conference, Boston, MA: ACM Press, pp. 10-15. Barabási, A.-L., & Albert, R. (1999). Emergence of scaling in random networks. Science, 286, 509-512 Barabási, A.-L., Albert, R., & Jeong, H. (2000). Scale-free characteristics of random networks: The topology of the World Wide Web. Physica, 281, 69-77 Barbará, D., & Chen, P. (2000, August 20 - 23). Using the fractal dimension to cluster datasets. Paper presented at the Sixth ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery in Data Mining, Boston, MA USA, pp. 260-264. Basilevsky, A. (1994). Statistical Factor Analysis and Related Methods: Theory and Applicatioms. New York: John Wiley & Sons. Bassecoulard, E., & Zitt, M. (1999). Indicators in a research institute: A multi-level classification of journals. Scientometrics, 44, 323-345 Battista, G., Eades, P., Tamassia, R., & Tollis, I. G. (1994). Algorithms for drawing graphs: An annotated bibliography. Computational Geometry: Theory and Applications, 4(5), 235-282 Battista, G. D., Eades, P., Tamassia, R., & Tollis, I. G. (1999). Graph Drawing: Algorithms for the Visualization of Graphs: Prentice Hall. Bederson, B. B., Hollan, J. D., Perlin, K., Meyer, J., Bacon, D., & Furnas, G. (1996). Pad++: A zoomable graphical sketchpad for exploring alternate interface physics. Journal of Visual Languages and Computing, 7(1), 331. Available: <Go to ISI>://A1996UF41800002. Bhattacharya, S., & Basu, P. K. (1998). Mapping a research area at the micro level using co-word analysis. Scientometrics, 43(3), 359-372 Bishop, C. M., Svensen, M., & Williams, C. K. I. (1998). GTM: The generative topographic mapping. Neural Computation, 10(1), 215-234. Available: <Go to ISI>://000071446700010. Borg, I., & Groenen, P. (1996). Modern Multidimensional Scaling: Springer. Borgman, C. L. (2000). Scholarly communication and bibliometrics revisited. In B. Cronin & H. B. Atkins (Eds.), Web of Knowledge: A Festschrift in honor of Eugene Garfield (pp. 143-162). Medford, NJ: Information Today. Borgman, C. L. (Ed.). (1990). Scholarly Communication and Bibliometrics. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications. Borgman, C. L., & Furner, J. (2002). Scholarly Communication and Bibliometrics. In B. Cronin & R. Shaw (Eds.), Annual Review of Information Science and Technology. Medford, NY: Information Today. Börner, K. (2000, June 2-7). Extracting and visualizing semantic structures in retrieval results for browsing. Paper presented at the ACM Digital Libraries, San Antonio, Texas, pp. 234-235. Börner, K. (2000, 19 -21July). Searching for the perfect match: A comparison of free sorting results for images by human subjects and by Latent Semantic Analysis. Paper presented at the Information Visualisation 2000, Symposium on Digital Libraries, London, England, pp. 192-197. Börner, K., Dillon, A., & Dolinsky, M. (2000). LVis - Digital Library Visualizer. Paper presented at the Information Visualisation 2000, Symposium on Digital Libraries, London, England, pp. 77-81. Börner, K., & Zhou, Y. (2001, July 25-27). A Software Repository for Education and Research in Information Visualization. Paper presented at the Information Visualisation Conference, London, England: IEEE Press, pp. 257-262.
Cronin, B., & Atkins, H. B. E. (2000). The Web of Knowledge: A Festschrift in Honor of Eugene Garfield: ASIST. Davidson, G. S., Hendrickson, B., Johnson, D. K., Meyers, C. E., & Wylie, B. N. (1998). Knowledge mining with VxInsight: Discovery through interaction. Journal of Intelligent Information Systems, 11(3), 259-285 Davidson, G. S., Wylie, B. N., & Boyack, K. W. (2001). Cluster stability and the use of noise in interpretation of clustering. Proc. IEEE Information Visualization 2001, 23-30 Deboeck, G., & Kohonen, T. (Eds.). (1998). Visual Explorations in Finance with Self-Organizing Maps: London: Springer-Verlag. Deerwester, S., Dumais, S. T., Landauer, T. K., Furnas, G. W., & Harshman, R. A. (1990). Indexing by Latent Semantic Analysis. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 41(6), 391-407 DeLooze, M. A., & Lemarie, J. (1997). Corpus relevance through co-word analysis: An application to plant proteins. Scientometrics, 39(3), 267-280 Ding, Y., Chowdhury, G., & Foo, S. (1999). Mapping the intellectual structure of information retrieval studies: an author co-citation analysis ; 1987-1997. Journal of Information Science, 25(1), 67-78 Ding, Y., Chowdhury, G. G., & Foo, S. (2000). Journal as markers of intellectual space: Journal co-citation analysis of information Retrieval area ; 1987-1997. Scientometrics, 47(1), 55-73 Dodge, M. (2001). Mapping how people use a website. Mappa Mundi Magazine. Available:
http://mappa.mundi.net/maps/maps_022/#ref_4. Dodge, M., & Kitchin, R. (2000). Mapping Cyberspace: Routledge. Dourish, P., & Chalmers, M. (1994). Running out of space: Models of information navigation. Paper presented at the HCI '94, Fabrikant, S. I. (2000). Spatialized Browsing in Large Data Archives. Transactions in GIS, 4(1), 65-78 Fabrikant, S. I., & Buttenfield, B. P. (2001). Formalizing Semantic Spaces for Information Access. Annals of the Association of American Cartigraphers, 91(2), 263-280 Feng, Y., & Börner, K. (2002, January 20-25). Using Semantic Treemaps to Categorize and Visualize Bookmark Files. Paper presented at the Visualization and Data Analysis. Proceedings of SPIE, P. C. C. Robert F. Erbacher, Matti Grohn, Jonathan C. Roberts, Craig M. Wittenbrink (Ed.) San Jose, CA, pp. 218-227. Fruchterman, T. M. J., & Reingold, E. M. (1991). Graph Drawing by Force-Directed Placement. Software-Practice & Experience, 21(11), 1129-1164 Fry, B. (2000). Organic information design. MIT, Master's Thesis. Furnas, G. W. (1986). Generalized fisheye views. Paper presented at the CHI '86: ACM Press, pp. 16-23. Furnas, G. W., & Zhang, X. (1998). MuSE: a multiscale editor. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 11th annual ACM symposium on User interface software and technology, San Francisco, CA, USA, pp. 107 116. Garfield, E. (1955). Citation indexes for science: A new dimension in documentation through association of ideas. Science, 122(108-111) Garfield, E. (1994). Scientography: Mapping the tracks of science. Current Contents: Social & Behavioural Sciences, 7(45), 5-10 Garfield, E., Sher, I. H., & Torpie, R. J. (1964). The use of citation data in writing the history of science. Philadelphia: Institute for Scientific Information. Garfield, E., & Small, H. (1989). Identifying the changing frontiers of science, [WWW]. The S. Neaman Press. Available: http://www.garfield.library.upenn.edu/papers/362/362.html [2000, June 26]. Gershon, N., Eick, S. G., & Card, S. (1998). Design: Information Visualization. Interactions, 5(2), 9-15 Gershon, N., & Ward, P. (2001). What Storytelling Can Do for Information Visualization. Communications of the ACM, 44(8). Available: http://www.acm.org/cacm/0801/0801toc.html. Glänzel, W. (2001). National characteristics in international scientific co-authorship relations. Scientometrics, 51, 69-115 Glänzel, W., & DeLange, C. (1997). Modelling and measuring multilateral co-authorship in international scientific collaboration. Part II. A comparative study on the extent and change of international scientific collaboration links. Scientometrics, 40, 605-626 Golledge, R. G. (1995). Primitives of Spatial Knowledge. In T. L. Nyerges & D. M. Mark & R. Laurini & M. J. Egenhofer (Eds.), Cognitive Aspects of Human-Computer Interaction for Geographic Information Systems (pp. 29-44): Dordrecht: Kluwer. Gorsuch, R. L. (1983). Factor analysis (2 ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. Halasz, F. (1988). Reflections on NoteCards: Seven issues for the next generation of hypermedia systems. Communications of the ACM, 31(7), 836-852
Halasz, F., Moran, T., & Trigg, R. (1986, December 1986). Notecards in a nutshell. Paper presented at the the ACM CHI+GI Conference, Austin, Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (1976). Cohesion In English: Longman. Han, J., & Kamber, M. (2000). Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques (1st edition ed.): Morgan Kaufmann Publishers. Harman, H. H. (1976). Modern Factor Analysis: University of Chicago Press. Harter, S. P., Nisonger, T. E., & Weng, A. W. (1993). Semantic Relationships between Cited and Citing Articles in Library and Information-Science Journals. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 44(9), 543-552. Available: <Go to ISI>://A1993LX51500004. He, Q. (1999). Knowledge discovery through co-word analysis. Library Trends, 48, 133-159 Hearst, M. A. (1999). User interfaces and visualization. In R. Baeza-Yates & B. Ribeiro-Neto (Eds.), Modern Information Retrieval (pp. 257-224): Addison-Wesley. Hendley, R. J., Drew, N. S., Wood, A. M., & Beale, R. (1995, October 30-31, 1995). Narcissus: Visualizing information. Paper presented at the Information Visualization '95 Symposium, Atlanta, GA: IEEE, pp. 9096. Herman, I., Melançon, G., & Marshall, M. S. (2000). Graph visualization and navigation in information visualization: a survey. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics(1), 24-44. Available: http://www.cwi.nl/~ivan/AboutMe/CV/Recent References.html. Hetzler, B., Whitney, P., Martucci, L., & Thomas, J. (1998). Multi-faceted insight through interoperable visual information analysis paradigms. Paper presented at the IEEE Information Visualization '98: IEEE, Hjorland, B. (1997). Information Seeking and Subject Representation: An Activity-Theoretical Approach to Information Science. Westport: Greenwood Press. Hjorland, B., & Albrechtsen, H. (1995). Toward a new horizon in information science: Domain analysis. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 46(6), 400-425 Hollan, J. D., Bederson, B. B., & Helfman, J. (1997). Information visualization. In M. G. Helenader & T. K. Landauer & P. Prabhu (Eds.), The Handbook of Human Computer Interaction (pp. 33-48). The Netherlands: Elsevier Science. ISI. (1981). ISI atlas of science: Biochemistry and molecular biology, 1978/80. Philadelphia, PA: Institute for Scientific Information. Kaski, S., Honkela, T., Lagus, K., & Kohonen, T. (1998). WEBSOM - Self-organizing maps of document collections. Neurocomputing, 21(1-3), 101-117 Kessler, M. M. (1963). Bibliographic coupling between scientific papers. American Documentation, 14, 10-25 Kim, S. K., Lund, J., Kiraly, M., Duke, K., Jiang, M., Stuart, J. M., Eizinger, A., Wylie, B. N., & Davidson, G. S. (2001). A Gene Expression Map for Caenorhabditis elegans. Science, 293, 2087-2092 King, J. (1987). A Review of Bibliometric and Other Science Indicators and Their Role in Research Evaluation. Journal of Information Science, 13(5), 261-276. Available: <Go to ISI>://A1987K402700001. Kleinberg, J. (1999). Authoritative sources in a hyperlinked environment. Journal of the ACM, 46(5), 604-632 Kohonen, T. (1985). The self-organizing map. Paper presented at the Proc. IEEE, vol. 73, pp. 1551-1558. Kohonen, T. (1995). Self-Organizing Maps: Springer. Kohonen, T., Kaski, S., Lagus, K., Salojarvi, J., Honkela, J., Paatero, V., & Saarela, A. (2000). Self organization of a massive document collection. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 11(3), 574-585 Koike, H. (1993). The role of another spatial dimension in software visualization. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, 11(3), 266-286 Koike, H., & Yoshihara, H. (1993). Fractal Approaches for Visualizing Huge Hierarchies. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 1993 IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages: IEEE/CS, pp. 55-60. Kostoff, R. N., Eberhart, H. J., & Toothman, D. R. (1998). Database tomography for technical intelligence: A roadmap of the near-earth space science and technology literature. Information Processing & Management, 34(1), 69-85 Kruskal, J., B. (1964). Nonmetric Multidimensional Scaling: A Numerical Method. Psychometrika, 29(2), 115-129. Kruskal, J. B. (1964). Multidimensional Scaling by Optimizing Goodness of Fit to a Nonmetric Hypothesis. Psychometrika, 29, 1-27 Kruskal, J. B. (1977). Multidimensional scaling and other methods for discovering structure. In K. Enslein & A. Ralston & H. Wilf (Eds.), Statistical Methods for Digital Computers. New York: Wiley. Kruskal, J. B., & Wish, M. (1984). Multidimensional Scaling. Beverly Hills and London: Sage Publications.
Lamping, J., Rao, R., & Pirolli, P. (1995). A focus+context technique based on hyperbolic geometry for visualizing large hierarchies. Paper presented at the ACM CHI'95 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 401-408. Landauer, T. K., Foltz, P. W., & Laham, D. (1998). Introduction to Latent Semantic Analysis. Discourse Processes, 25, 259-284. Available: http://lsa.colorado.edu/. Lawrence, S., Giles, C. L., & Bollacker, K. (1999). Digital libraries and autonomous citation indexing. IEEE Computer, 32(6), 67-71. Available: http://www.neci.nj.nec.com/home. Lee, R. C. T., Slagle, J. R., & Blum, H. (1977). A triangulation method for the sequential mapping of points from NSpace to Two-Space. IEEE Transactions on Computer(26), 288-292 Leydesdorff, L. (1994). The generation of aggregated journal-journal citation maps on the basis of the CD-ROM version of the Science Citation Index. Scientometrics, 47, 143-164 Leydesdorff, L., & Wouters, P. (2000). Between texts and contexts: Advances in theories of citation. Available:
http://www.chem.uva.nl/sts/loet/citation/rejoin.htm [2000, June 26]. Lin, X. (1997). Map displays for information retrieval. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 48(1), 40-54 Lin, X., Soergel, D., & Marchionini, G. (1991). A self-organizing semantic map for information retrieval. Paper presented at the 14th. Annual International ACM/SIGIR Conference on Research & Design in Information Retrieval, Y. C. A. Brokstein, G. Salton, & V.V.Raghuvan (Ed.): New York: ACM Press, pp. 262-269. Lin, Y., & Kaid, L. L. (2000). Fragmentation of the intellectual structure of political communication study: Some empirical evidence. Scientometrics, 47(1), 143-164 Mackinlay, J. D., Rao, R., & Card, S. K. (1995). An Organic User Interface For Searching Citation Links. Paper presented at the CHI, Denver, Colorado: ACM, Mahlck, P., & Persson, O. (2000). Socio-bibliometric mapping of intra-departmental networks. Scientometrics, 49(1), 81-91 Mandelbrot, B. B. (1988). Fractal Geometry of Nature: W H Freeman & Co. McCain, K. W. (1990). Mapping authors in intellectual space: A technical overview. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 41(6), 433-443 McCain, K. W. (1995). The structure of biotechnology research-and-development. Scientometrics, 32(2), 153-175 McCain, K. W. (1998). Neural networks research in context: A longitudinal journal cogitation analysis of an emerging interdisciplinary field. Scientometrics, 41(3), 389-410 McCormick, B. H., DeFanti, T. A., & Brown, M. D. (1987). Visualization in scientific computing: Report of the NSF Advisory Panel on Graphics, Image Processing and Workstations. McQuaid, M. J., Ong, T. H., Chen, H. C., & Nunamaker, J. F. (1999). Multidimensional scaling for group memory visualization. Decision Support Systems, 27(1-2), 163-176. Available: <Go to ISI>://000084396700010. Mostafa, J., Quiroga, L. M., & Palakal, M. (1998). Filtering medical documents using automated and human classification methods. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 49(14), 1304-1318. Available: <Go to ISI>://000077119700008. Mukherjea, S. (1999). Information visualization for hypermedia systems. ACM Computing Surveys Munzner, T. (1997). H3: Laying out large directed graphs in 3D hyperbolic space. Paper presented at the the 1997 IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization, J. Dill & N. Gershon (Eds.), Phoenix, AZ: IEEE, pp. 2-10. Munzner, T. (1998). Exploring large graphs in 3D hyperbolic space. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 18(4), 18-23. Available: http://graphics.stanford.edu/papers/h3cga/html/. Narin, F., & Moll, J. K. (1977). Bibliometrics. In M. E. Williams (Ed.), Annual Review of Information Science and Technology (Vol. 12, pp. 35-58). White Plains, NY: Knowledge Industry Publications. Nederhof, A. J., & Noyons, E. C. M. (1992). International comparison of departments research performance in the humanities. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 43(3), 249-256. Available: <Go to ISI>://A1992HK01700006. Nederhof, A. J., & Zwaan, R. A. (1991). Quality Judgments of Journals as Indicators of Research Performance in the Humanities and the Social and Behavioral-Sciences. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 42(5), 332-340. Available: <Go to ISI>://A1991FN78000003. Newman, M. E. J. (2001a). Scientific collaboration networks. I. Network construction and fundamental results. Physical Review E, 64, 016131 Newman, M. E. J. (2001b). Scientific collaboration networks. II. Shortest paths, weighted networks, and centrality. Physical Review E, 64, 016132
Nisonger, T. E., Harter, S. P., & Weng, A. (1992). Subject Relationships between Cited and Citing Documents in Library and Information-Science. Proceedings of the Asis Annual Meeting, 29, 13-19. Available: <Go to ISI>://A1992JV32500004. Noyons, E. (2001). Bibliometric mapping of science in a science policy context. Scientometrics, 50(1), 83-98. Available: <Go to ISI>://000167170600007. Noyons, E. C. M., Moed, H. F., & Luwel, M. (1999). Combining mapping and citation analysis for evaluative bibliometric purposes: A bibliometric study. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 50(2), 115-131. Available: <Go to ISI>://000078411700003. Noyons, E. C. M., Moed, H. F., & Van Raan, A. F. J. (1999). Integrating research performance analysis and science mapping. Scientometrics, 46(3), 591-604. Available: <Go to ISI>://000084660600017. Noyons, E. C. M., & Van Raan, A. F. J. (1998). Advanced mapping of science and technology. Scientometrics, 41(1-2), 61-67. Available: <Go to ISI>://000071770100006. Noyons, E. C. M., & van Raan, A. F. J. (1998). Monitoring scientific developments from a dynamic perspective: Self-organized structuring to map neural network research. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 49(1), 68-81. Available: <Go to ISI>://000071048000009. Palmer, S. E. (1999). Vision science: From Photons to Phenomenology. Cambridge, MA: Bradford Books/MIT Press. Persson, O. (2001). All author citations versus first author citations. Scientometrics, 50(2), 339-344. Available: <Go to ISI>://000167664900010. Pirolli, P., & Card, S. (1999). Information foraging. Psychological Review, 106(4), 643-675. Available: <Go to ISI>://000083338800001. Pirolli, P., Schank, P., Hearst, M., & Diehl, C. (1996). Scatter/Gather browsing communicates the topic structure of a very large text collection. Paper presented at the the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '96), Vancouver, BC: ACM Press, Polanco, X., Francois, C., & Lamirel, J. C. (2001). Using artificial neural networks for mapping of science and technology: A multi-self-organizing-maps approach. Scientometrics, 51(1), 267-292 Price, D. D. (1961). Science since Babylon. New Haven: Yale University Press. Price, D. D. (1963). Little Science, Big Science.Unpublished manuscript. Price, D. D. (1965). Networks of scientific papers. Science, 149, 510-515 Price, D. D. (1986). Little Science, Big Science and Beyond. New York: Columbia University Press. Qin, J. (2000). Semantic similarities between a keyword database and a controlled vocabulary database: An investigation in the antibiotic resistance literature. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 51(2), 166-180 Raghavan, V. V., & Wong, S. K. M. (1986). A critical analysis of vector space model for information retrieval. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 37(5), 279-287 Raghupathi, W., & Nerur, S. P. (1999). Research themes and trends in artificial intelligence: An author co-citation analysis. Intelligence, 10(2) Rennison, E. (1994). Galaxy of News -- An Approach to Visualizing and Understanding Expansive News Landscapes. Paper presented at the ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, Rorvig, M. (1999). Images of similarity: a visual exploration of optimal similarity metrics and scaling properties of TREC topic-document sets. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 50(8), 639-651 Roweis, S. T., & Saul, L. K. (2000). Nonlinear Dimensionality Reduction by Locally Linear Embedding. Science, 290(5500), 2323-2326 Salton, G., Allan, J., & Buckley, C. (1994). Automatic Structuring and Retrieval of Large Text Files. Communications of the Acm, 37(2), 97-108. Available: <Go to ISI>://A1994MU59200013. Salton, G., Allan, J., Buckley, C., & Singhal, A. (1994). Automatic-Analysis, Theme Generation, and Summary of Machine-Readable Texts. Science, 264(5164), 1421-1426. Available: <Go to ISI>://A1994NP22100032. Salton, G., & Buckley, C. (1988). Parallel Text Search Methods. Communications of the Acm, 31(2), 202-215. Available: <Go to ISI>://A1988M209000010. Salton, G., & Buckley, C. (1991). Global Text Matching for Information-Retrieval. Science, 253(5023), 1012-1015. Available: <Go to ISI>://A1991GC98200040. Salton, G., Yang, C., & Wong, A. (1975). A vector space model for automatic indexing. Communications of the ACM, 18(11), 613-620 Salvador, M. R., & Lopez-Martinez, R. E. (2000). Cognitive structure of research: Scientometric mapping in sintered materials. Research Evaluation, 9, 189-200
Sandstrom, P. E. (2001). Scholarly communication as a socioecological system. Scientometrics, 51(3), 573-605. Available: <Go to ISI>://000170653400011. Sarkar, M., & Brown, M. H. (1994). Graphical fisheye views. Communications of the ACM, 37(12), 73-84 Schvaneveldt, R. W. (1990). Pathfinder Associative Networks: Studies in Knowledge Organization. Norwood. NJ: Ablex Publishing. Schwechheimer, H., & Winterhager, M. (1999). Highly dynamic specialities in climate research. Scientometrics, 44(3), 547-560 Schwechheimer, H., & Winterhager, M. (2001). Mapping interdisciplinary research fronts in neuroscience: A bibliometric view to retrograde amnesia. Scientometrics, 51(1), 311-318 Shneiderman, B. (1992). Tree visualization with tree-maps: A 2-d space filling approach. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 11(1), 92 - 99 Shneiderman, B. (1996). The eyes have it: a task by data type taxonomy for information visualizations. Paper presented at the Symposium on Visual Languages, Boulder, CO: Proceedings of IEEE, pp. 336-343. Shneiderman, B. (1997). Designing the User Interface : Strategies for Effective Human-Computer Interaction (3 ed.): Addison-Wesley Pub Co. Shneiderman, B. (2000). Creating creativity: User interfaces for supporting innovation. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, 7(1), 114-138 Skupin, A. (2000, October 2000). From Metaphor to Method: Cartographic Perspectives on Information Visualization. Paper presented at the Proceedings of InfoVis 2000, Salt Lake City, UT: IEEE Computer Society, pp. 91-97. Skupin, A. (2001). Cartographic Considerations for Map-Like Interfaces to Digital Libraries. Paper presented at the Visual Interfaces to Digital Libraries - Its Past, Present, and Future, JCDL Workshop, K. Borner & C. Chen (Eds.), Roanoke, VA, Skupin, A., & Buttenfield, B. P. (1996). Spatial Metaphors for Visualizing Very Large Data Archives. Paper presented at the GIS/LIS'96, Bethesda: American Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, pp. 607-617. Small, H. (1994). A SCI-MAP case study: Building a map of AIDS research. Scientometrics, 30(1), 229-241 Small, H. (1995). Navigating the citation network. Proc. 58th Annual Meeting of the American Society for Information Science, 32, 118-126 Small, H. (1997). Update on science mapping: Creating large document spaces. Scientometrics, 38(2), 275-293 Small, H. (1999a). A passage through science: Crossing disciplinary boundaries. Library Trends, 48(1), 72-108 Small, H. (1999b). Visualizing science by citation mapping. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 50(9), 799-813. Available: <Go to ISI>://000081198600009. Small, H. (2000). Charting pathways through science: Exploring Garfield's vision of a unified index to science. Web of Knowledge - a Festschrift in Honor of Eugene Garfield, 449-473. Available: <Go to ISI>://000167603300024. Spence, B. (2000). Information Visualization: Addison-Wesley. Spence, B. (2001). Information Visualization: Addison-Wesley. Tenenbaum, J. B., de Silva, V., & Langford, J. C. (2000). A Global Geometric Framework for Nonlinear Dimensionality Reduction. Science, 290(5500), 2319-2323 Thurstone, L. L. (1931). Multiple Factor Analysis. Psychological Review, 38, 406-427 Tryon, R. C. (1939). Cluster Analysis: New York: McGraw-Hill. Tufte, E. R. (1983). The Visual Display of Quantitative Information. Cheshire, CT: Graphics Press. Tufte, E. R. (1990). Envisioning Information. Cheshire, CT: Graphics Press. Tufte, E. R. (1997). Visual Explanations. Cheshire, CT: Graphics Press. van Dalen, H. P., & Henkens, K. (2001). What Makes a Scientific Article Influential? The Case of Demographers. Scientometrics, 50(3), 455-482 van Raan, A. (2000). The Pandora's box of citation analysis: Measuring scientific excellence - The last evil? In H. Atkins (Ed.), The Web of Knowledge: A Festschrift in Honor of Eugene Garfield (pp. 301-319): ASIS. Ware, C. (2000). Information Visualization: Perception for Design: Morgan Kaufmann. White, H. D., Buzydlowsky, J., & Xia, L. (2000). Co-cited author maps as interfaces to digital libraries. Paper presented at the IEEE Information Visualization Conference, London, UK, pp. 25-30. White, H. D., & Griffith, B. C. (1982). Authors and markers of intellectual space: Co-citation studies of science, technology and society. Journal of Documentation, 38(4), 255-272 White, H. D., & McCain, K. W. (1989). Bibliometrics. In M. E. Williams (Ed.), Annual Review of Information Science & Technology (Vol. 24, pp. 119-186). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier Science.
White, H. D., & McCain, K. W. (1997). Visualization of literatures. In M. E. Williams (Ed.), Annual Review of Information Science and Technology (Vol. 32, pp. 99-168). Medford, NJ: Information Today. White, H. D., & McCain, K. W. (1998). Visualizing a discipline: An author co-citation analysis of information science, 1972-1995. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 49(4), 327-356 Wilson, C. S. (2001). Informetrics. In M. E. Williams (Ed.), Annual Review of Information Science and Technology (Vol. 34, pp. 107-286). Medford, NJ: Information Today. Wise, J. A. (1999). The ecological approach to text visualization. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 50(13), 1224-1233 Wise, J. A., Thomas, J. J., Pennock, K., Lantrip, D., Pottier, M., Schur, A., & Crow, V. (1995, October 30-31, 1995). Visualizing the non-visual: Spatial analysis and interaction with information from text documents. Paper presented at the EEE Symposium on Information Visualization '95, Atlanta, Georgia, USA: IEEE Computer Society Press, Yang, C. C., Chen, H., & Hong, K. K. (1999, August 11 - 14). Visualization tools for self-organizing maps. Paper presented at the Fourth International ACM Conference on Digital Libraries, Berkeley, CA USA, pp. 258259. Zhu, D., & Porter, A. L. (2002). Automated extraction and visualization of information for technological intelligence and forecasting. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, to appear

CERN-EP-2024-001 LHCb-PAPER-2023-038 August 9, 2024
Measurements of the branching fraction ratio B(ϕ →µ+µ−)/B(ϕ →e+e−) with charm meson decays
Measurements of the branching fraction ratio B(ϕ →µ+µ−)/B(ϕ →e+e−) with s →π+ϕ and D+ →π+ϕ decays, denoted Rs ϕπ and Rd ϕπ, are presented. The analysis is performed using a dataset corresponding to an integrated luminosity of 5.4 fb−1
of pp collision data collected with the LHCb experiment. The branching fractions are normalised with respect to the B+ →K+J/ψ(→e+e−) and B+ →K+J/ψ(→µ+µ−) decay modes. The combination of the results yields
Rϕπ = 1.022 ± 0.012 (stat) ± 0.048 (syst).
arXiv:2402.01336v5 [hep-ex] 21 Jan 2025
The result is compatible with previous measurements of the ϕ →ℓ+ℓ−branching fractions and predictions based on the Standard Model.
Published in JHEP 05 (2024) 293
© 2025 CERN for the benefit of the LHCb collaboration. CC BY 4.0 licence.
†Authors are listed at the end of this paper.
A particularly sensitive way of searching for physics beyond the Standard Model (SM) is to make high-precision experimental tests of accidental symmetries that arise in the SM. One such accidental symmetry is lepton flavour universality (LFU), whereby the strength of the electroweak couplings for charged leptons is independent of their flavour. The violation of LFU is a common feature in extensions of the SM, and branching fraction ratios of hadron decays involving different lepton species constitute a sensitive probe for physics beyond the SM, since they are largely free from hadronic uncertainties. There has been much activity in testing LFU in b-hadron decays over the last decade at LHCb. In b →sℓ+ℓ−decays, where ℓrepresents either an electron or a muon, the most recent LFU measurements [1,2] are consistent with the SM with a precision of 5% that is statistically limited. Several cross-checks are performed in the b →sℓ+ℓ−LFU analyses to reinforce confidence in the results. The most stringent of these checks is the ratio rJ/ψ = B(B+ →HsJ/ψ(→µ+µ−))/B(B+ →HsJ/ψ(→e+e−)), where Hs represents a strange meson. The measurement of the ratio rJ/ψ requires significantly more control over the efficiencies than the LFU measurements themselves and was found to be compatible with the SM prediction in all measurements [3–7]. The variation of the efficiency as a function of several kinematic variables, such as the maximum transverse momentum of the two leptons, is also performed and no significant systematic effects are seen. Finally, the double ratio for the ψ(2S) and J/ψ resonances, Rψ(2S), is performed and is also found to be compatible with unity for all measurements [3–7]. The robustness of the efficiency for the existing LFU measurements at the current level of precision is therefore clear. However, as the statistical precision improves in the future, analysing a control channel in the q2 region complementary to those performed in the existing analyses will be important to keep systematic uncertainties subdominant. The branching fraction ratios
R(d,s) B(D+ (s) →π+ϕ(→µ+µ−))
B(D+ (s) →π+ϕ(→e+e−)) , (1)
where ϕ refers to the ϕ(1020) meson, are ideal quantities in this respect [8]. As the decay is dominated by photon exchange, LFU is expected to hold in this process. The invariant mass of the ϕ meson means that this decay occurs at a q2 value below many of the existing LFU measurements. The decays D+ (s) →π+ϕ have a large branching fraction [9] and a fully charged final state, meaning that high precision tests can be performed.1
Furthermore, the current precision of B(ϕ →µ+µ−)/B(ϕ →e+e−) is 6%, obtained by comparing the individual branching fraction measurements from Refs. [10–12]. This test is entirely limited by the branching fraction of B(ϕ →µ+µ−) [12], which provides the opportunity to improve the precision of that branching fraction. This paper presents a measurement of B(ϕ →µ+µ−)/B(ϕ →e+e−) based on a dataset corresponding to an integrated luminosity of 5.4 fb−1 of pp collisions collected with the LHCb detector between 2016 and 2018. Similarly to the b →sℓ+ℓ−LFU measurements performed by the LHCb collaboration, the signals are measured with respect to the B+ →K+J/ψ(→ℓ+ℓ−) decay modes. The double ratio strategy, which consists in comparing the branching fraction ratios of signal and normalisation modes
1The inclusion of the charge-conjugate mode is implied.
with the same topology, ensures that the knowledge of absolute efficiencies is unnecessary. This normalisation assumes that LFU holds in J/ψ decays, which has been verified well beyond the precision of this measurement [9]. The paper is organised as follows: firstly, a brief overview of the LHCb experiment is given in Sect. 2, along with a description of the dataset. Secondly, the signal selection is given in Sect. 3 and the remaining backgrounds and signal-yield determination are discussed in Sect. 4. The determination of the reconstruction and selection efficiency of the signal and normalisation modes is presented in Sect. 5. The values of these efficiencies were kept blind until the analysis was finalised to avoid experimenter bias. Sources of systematic uncertainties and their impact are discussed in Sect. 6. Finally, the results and conclusion are presented in Sect. 7.
The LHCb detector and simulation
The LHCb detector [13, 14] is a single-arm forward spectrometer covering the pseudorapidity range 2 < η < 5, designed for the study of particles containing b or c quarks. The detector includes a high-precision tracking system consisting of a siliconstrip vertex detector surrounding the pp interaction region [15], a large-area silicon-strip detector located upstream of a dipole magnet with a bending power of about 4 Tm, and three stations of silicon-strip detectors and straw drift tubes [16] placed downstream of the magnet. The tracking system provides a measurement of the momentum, p, of charged particles with a relative uncertainty that varies from 0.5% at low momentum to 1.0% at 200 GeV/c. The minimum distance of a track to a primary pp collision vertex (PV), the impact parameter (IP), is measured with a resolution of (15 + 29/pT) µm, where pT is the component of the momentum transverse to the beam, in GeV/c. Different types of charged hadrons are distinguished using information from two ring-imaging Cherenkov detectors [17]. Photons, electrons and hadrons are identified by a calorimeter system consisting of scintillating-pad (SPD) and preshower detectors, an electromagnetic and a hadronic calorimeter. Muons are identified by a system composed of alternating layers of iron and multiwire proportional chambers [18]. Simulation is required to model the effects of the detector acceptance and to account for the imposed selection requirements. In the simulation, pp collisions are generated using Pythia [19] with a specific LHCb configuration [20]. Decays of unstable particles are described by EvtGen [21], in which final-state radiation is generated using Photos [22]. The interaction of the generated particles with the detector, and its response, are implemented using the Geant4 toolkit [23], as described in Ref. [24].
The online event selection is performed by a trigger [25], which consists of a hardware stage, based on information from the calorimeter and muon systems, followed by a software stage, which applies a full event reconstruction. At the hardware trigger stage, candidates with muons are required to have at least one high-pT muon track. Decays involving electrons are required to either include a high-pT electron, a high-pT hadron or be triggered independently of the final state. The data selected by these three trigger methods in the electron channel are treated as separate categories in the analysis.
The software trigger is split into two stages, with the first requiring one or two tracks with high IP and pT. In between the two software stages, an alignment and calibration of the detector is performed in near real-time and the results are used in the second stage of the software trigger [26]. The same alignment and calibration information is propagated to the offline reconstruction, ensuring that the particle identification (PID) is of high quality and consistent between the trigger and offline analysis. The identical performance of the online and offline reconstruction enables physics analyses to be performed directly using candidates reconstructed in the trigger [25,27], which the present analysis exploits for the signal channels. In the second software stage, exclusive selection requirements designed to select (s) →h+ℓ+ℓ−candidates are applied. Three tracks are required to be inconsistent with originating from any PV, to have pT > 300 MeV/c and p > 2000 MeV/c. These tracks are combined to form a good-quality vertex that is significantly displaced with respect to any PV. For each electron track, a search is therefore made in the ECAL for bremsstrahlung energy deposits around the extrapolated track direction before the magnet that are not associated with any other charged tracks. The energy of any such deposit is added to the electron energy that is derived from the measurements made in the tracking system. Bremsstrahlung photons can be added to none, either, or both of the final-state e+ and e−candidates. The invariant mass of the reconstructed final state particles is required to fall within 200 MeV/c2 of the known D+ mass [9]. The angle between the momentum vector of the charm meson candidate and the line connecting the PV to the decay vertex must be less than 14 mrad. To select the ϕ →ℓ+ℓ−decay, a dilepton mass window of 990 – 1050 MeV/c2 for muons and 870 – 1110 MeV/c2 for electrons is applied. The trigger strategy for the normalisation mode B+ →K+J/ψ is an inclusive selection that forms two- and three-track combinations with a high-quality vertex that is significantly displaced from any PV. The B+ →K+J/ψ candidates are then built offline, requiring that a well-identified kaon is combined with two leptons to form a high-quality vertex. These candidates must be consistent with originating from a PV and their decay vertex must be significantly displaced from that PV. In order to select the J/ψ resonance, the dilepton invariant mass is required to be between 2946 – 3176 MeV/c2 for muons and 2450 – 3600 MeV/c2 for electrons. The offline selection encompasses invariant mass vetoes and multivariate analysis techniques. Doubly misidentified background from D+ →K−π+π+ decays, where a kaon and a pion are reconstructed as electrons, is rejected by removing candidates that have a K−π+π+ invariant mass within 30 MeV/c2 of the D+ mass [9]. Background sources coming from doubly misidentified D+ (s) →π+π−π+ decays with two pions misidentified as electrons are reduced by the use of particle-identification (PID) criteria. The remaining contamination from this source is included in the fit used to determine the signal yield as described in Sect. 4. A kinematic fit that constrains the dilepton invariant mass to the known ϕ (J/ψ) mass [9] is performed to each candidate of the signal (normalisation) mode. In the following, these quantities are referred to as mϕ(π+ℓ+ℓ−) and mJ/ψ(K+ℓ+ℓ−), respectively. Their distributions are used to extract the signal and normalisation yields via maximum-likelihood fits to the data and to define the sideband regions, summarised in Table 1. The dominant source of background is combinatorial in nature, whereby the tracks do not originate from a common particle decay. To reduce this background for both signal and normalisation modes, separate Boosted Decision Tree (BDT) classifiers [28,29] are trained. The BDT classifiers use a combination of kinematic and geometric information
Decay mode mϕ(π+ℓ+ℓ−) mJ/ψ(K+ℓ+ℓ−) [ MeV/c2] [ MeV/c2]
µ+µ− /∈[1810,2040] /∈[1840,2000] > 5580 > 5480
such as the final state impact parameters and kinematics. The most discriminating variable for both signal and normalisation modes is the angle between the momentum vector of the D+ (s) or B+ and the line connecting the PV with their decay vertices. The requirement on the response of the BDT classifier for the signal mode is optimised using the Punzi figure of merit [30] Ns/(σ/2 + √Nb), where σ = 5, Ns is the number of signal candidates as determined from simulation, and Nb is the number of background events extrapolated from the sideband regions for the signal modes. The efficiency for the BDT classifier selection is 59.2% (70.8%) on the electron (muon) signal with a 92.8% (85.4%) rejection rate for the electron (muon) background. To optimise the BDT classifier response in normalisation mode decays, the metric Ns/√Nb is used instead. The use of this metric results in a very pure sample, which simplifies kinematic comparisons between data and simulation. The signal selection efficiency in this case is 99.2% (92.3%) on the electron (muon) signal, with a 81.5% (87.0%) rejection rate for the electron (muon) background.
Signal yield determination
The signal yield is determined in categories of the different run periods and trigger conditions by means of a maximum-likelihood fit to the mϕ(π+ℓ+ℓ−) distributions of the signal candidates. The ϕ mass constraint significantly improves the invariant-mass resolution in the electron channels and leaves the muon channels largely unchanged. The result of the fit is shown in Fig. 1. The signal lineshapes for the electron modes are described by the sum of two Crystal Ball functions [31] with common mean peak position and different width and tail parameters. The lineshapes are determined separately in three bremsstrahlung categories, depending on whether none, one or both electrons are associated with bremsstrahlung photons. The width and tail parameters of these distributions, as well as the fractions of each bremsstrahlung category, are determined from simulation. In order to account for residual differences in the signal shape between data and simulation, an offset in the peak position and a scaling of the resolution are allowed to vary in the fits to the data. The muon decay mode is described with a Gaussian and the sum of two Crystal Ball functions. The shape parameters of these distributions are determined from simulation, with an offset in the peak position and scaling of the resolution allowed. The combinatorial background is expected to follow an exponential shape as a function of the invariant mass in the case of the muon channel. However, due to the significantly worse resolution of the dilepton invariant mass in the electron channel, the ϕ mass constraint
Candidates / (4.6 MeV/
Candidates / (7.6 MeV/
1800 1900 2000 2100 ) [MeV/
induces a strong variation of the efficiency as a function of mϕ(π+ℓ+ℓ−) near the boundaries of the π+ℓ+ℓ−invariant mass selection requirement (1770 – 2070 MeV/c2) in the trigger. Therefore, the combinatorial background for the electron mode is parameterised by a third-order polynomial. This parameterisation is verified on a sample of candidates with leptons of same charge (same-sign) and a sample where the BDT classifier requirement is inverted to favour the combinatorial background, as shown in Fig. 2 (left). The dominant peaking background originates from D+ (s) →π+π−π+ decays, where two pions are misidentified as either two muons or two electrons. Due to the narrow ϕ mass window and the high rejection rate of the muon identification requirements, the contribution from this source in the muon mode is negligible. In the electron case, the
Same sign data Same sign fit Inverted BDT data Inverted BDT fit
Candidates / (7.6 MeV/
Candidates / (4.6 MeV/
1850 1900 1950 2000 2050 ) [MeV/
1800 1900 2000 2100 ) [MeV/
size and shape of this background are obtained by reversing the electron identification requirements in data. A fit to the invariant-mass distribution of candidates that fail the PID criteria is used to distinguish D+ and D+ s contributions from combinatorial background in the reversed electron ID sample. The invariant mass is computed using the relevant mass hypothesis for each track. The result of this fit is shown in Fig. 2 (right). The sPlot [32] weights resulting from this fit and the misidentification (misID) probabilities from data are employed to translate the sample lineshape and yield to the signal region, obtaining a model for the doubly misidentified background component. In the signal-yield determination fit, the yield of this background component is constrained using a Gaussian penalty function to the value obtained using the data-driven misID probabilities. The validity of this procedure is verified with a dedicated study described in Sect. 6. The yields of the normalisation modes are determined via a maximum-likelihood fit to the mJ/ψ(K+ℓ+ℓ−) distribution, as shown in Fig. 3. By analogy to the signal decays, the mass is obtained with the dilepton invariant mass constrained to the known J/ψ mass. This procedure vastly improves the resolution for both the electron and muon channels. The lineshapes for the normalisation channels are described with the same parameterisation as for the signal channels. Unlike the ϕ meson, the J/ψ meson has a negligible natural width compared to the resolution, therefore the combinatorial background shape is unaffected by the J/ψ mass constraint, and is described with an exponential function. Due to the worse resolution of the electron channel, the dominant background in the electron mode comes from partially reconstructed B(0,+) →K+π(−,0)J/ψ(→e+e−) decays, where the pion is not included in the B+ candidate. The lineshape of this component is obtained from simulation, while its yield is free to float in the fit. A small contribution from misidentified B+ →π+J/ψ(→ℓ+ℓ−) background is included on the right-hand side of both muon and electron signal peaks. Their shape is obtained from simulation and their yield is constrained to the value obtained using the data-driven misID probabilities. The small disagreement near 5400 MeV/c2 in the muon mode has a negligible impact on the signal-yield determination. The total yields are obtained summing over the fit results for different trigger categories
Part. Reco. Combinatorial
Candidates / (4 MeV/
Candidates / (12 MeV/
5200 5400 5600 ) [MeV/
5200 5300 5400 5500 5600 ) [MeV/
and run periods, and are summarised in Table 2. In the muon channel, the correlation between the D+ →π+ϕ and D+ s →π+ϕ yields is negligible, while in the electron channel the two yields are correlated by 30 – 45%, depending on the trigger category, due to the worse mass resolution for electrons.
Efficiency calculation
The yields in Table 2 are used to compute R(d,s) according to the definition
R(d,s) = N (d,s)(π+ϕ(→µ+µ−))
N (d,s)(π+ϕ(→e+e−)) ε(d,s)(π+ϕ(→e+e−)) ε(d,s)(π+ϕ(→µ+µ−))
where N (d,s)(X) and ε(d,s)(X) are the yields and efficiencies to detect the decay X initiated by a D+ (s) meson. The relative electron to muon efficiencies for signal and normalisation channels are determined from simulation. The efficiencies for each run period are obtained from a direct sum over the efficiency in each trigger category. The total efficiency for each channel is obtained by performing a luminosity-weighted average in the different run periods and are combined with the yields in Table 2 to derive the final result. The simulation has several data-driven corrections applied, largely following the procedure used for the RK measurement described in Ref. [6], where each correction is applied with respect to the preceding one. Firstly, the tracking efficiency for electrons is determined using a tag-and-probe method applied to a B+ →K+J/ψ(→e+e−) sample [33]. The difference in tracking efficiency between data and simulated samples, as a function of the pseudorapidity, the azimuthal angle ϕ and the pT of the probe particle, is corrected for. The effect of these corrections is less than 1%, reflecting the good agreement between simulation and data. The PID efficiency is obtained from simulation using a set of control channels in data that can be efficiently selected without the application of PID criteria. These samples include the decays D∗+ →D0π+ for hadron identification and h →ℓmisID and B+ →K+J/ψ(→µ+µ−) for muon identification. The PID distribution in data is obtained using the sPlot procedure [34] as a function of the muon transverse momentum and pseudorapidity. The fraction of these distributions above the PID selection criteria are then used as PID efficiencies determined from data. For the electron PID response, the efficiencies are determined by refitting the signal B+ →K+J/ψ(→e+e−) yield before
D+ →π+ϕ(→e+e−) 7 460 ± 140 D+ →π+ϕ(→µ+µ−) 43 512 ± 220 s →π+ϕ(→e+e−) 16 740 ± 210 s →π+ϕ(→µ+µ−) 87 022 ± 300 B+ →K+J/ψ(→e+e−) 638 600 ± 900 B+ →K+J/ψ(→µ+µ−) 2 187 000 ± 1 500
and after the PID selection in bins of kinematic variables and bremsstrahlung recovery category, therefore taking into account differences in the background shape as a function of the PID response. The correction due to the assumption of factorisation of per-electron PID efficiencies is determined using simulation and is found to have a <0.1% effect on the overall efficiency. An initial set of corrections that are designed to account for the mis-modelling of the production kinematics and vertex quality in the simulation are applied. These corrections are obtained using the muon channels and applied to both muon and electron channels after the PID and tracking corrections have been applied. The corrections comprise a two-dimensional correction as a function of the B+ and D+ (s) transverse momentum and pseudorapidity, followed by a one-dimensional correction to the quality of the fits to the B+ and D+ (s) decay vertices. These corrections are applied iteratively to account for the correlation between the vertex quality and the production kinematics. Only two iterations are needed to obtain a satisfactory agreement in all three variables. The corrections to the efficiencies discussed below are obtained after applying these initial corrections to the simulation. The largest efficiency difference between muons and electrons in the experiment originates from the trigger, where the pT requirement for electrons is significantly more restrictive than for muons. Even when combining the three electron trigger categories, the total trigger efficiency of the electron channel is around 20% of the muon channel. The normalisation channel is used to compare the trigger response between data and simulation, via a tag-and-probe method. For example, the kaon from the B+ →K+J/ψ(→e+e−) decay, referred to as the tag, is required to pass a set of trigger requirements. The efficiency of the electron trigger is then determined by the fraction of candidates where either of the two electrons is also selected by the trigger. This efficiency is compared between data and simulation as a function of the maximum pT of the two electrons, which is expected to be the kinematic variable on which the electron trigger efficiency most strongly depends. The efficiency for the hadron and muon triggers are determined in a similar way, as a function of the pT of the kaon or muon. The discrepancy between measured and simulated efficiencies to trigger independently of the signal, is corrected differently, depending on the particle species that fired the trigger. For events triggered by any muon or hadron that are not part of the signal candidate, the trigger efficiency is parametrised in terms of the transverse momentum of the B meson, while for events triggered by an electron or a photon which are not part of the signal, the maximum pT of the dilepton pair is used. A final set of corrections is obtained to correct for any residual mismodelling of the efficiencies as a function of the B+(D+ (s)) production kinematic and geometrical quantities. Similar to the initial corrections, an iterative reweighting procedure is applied as a function of the B+(D+ (s)) pT and pseudorapidity, the B+(D+ (s)) vertex-fit quality and the χ2 IP with respect to the associated PV, where χ2 IP is defined as the difference in the vertex-fit χ2
of the PV reconstructed with and without the considered particle. These corrections are obtained using the muon channels, and are assumed to be independent of the lepton species and trigger category. This set of corrections is obtained after having accounted for the mismodelling of the PID and trigger efficiencies in the electron modes as well, enabling evaluation of the systematic uncertainty due to these assumptions. Finally, the dilepton invariant mass distribution is compared between data and simulation for B+ →K+J/ψ(→e+e−) candidates. The dilepton invariant mass distribution of simulated events is fitted with a double-sided Crystal Ball [31] function. This shape is
Candidates / (4.8 MeV/
Candidates / (4.8 MeV/
900 950 1000 1050 1100 ) [MeV/ +e(
900 950 1000 1050 1100 ) [MeV/ +e(
Candidates / (1.2 MeV/
Candidates / (1.2 MeV/
1000 1020 1040 ) [MeV/
1000 1020 1040 ) [MeV/
then used to fit the data distribution with the mean and scale parameters, representing the mismatch between simulated and measured q2 resolution, allowed to vary in the fit. These resolution parameters are determined as a function of the number of recovered bremsstrahlung photons and the trigger category. Overall, the resolution in the data is found to be 10 – 20% worse than in simulation, with a shift in the peak position of around 2 – 10 MeV/c2, depending on the trigger category. This resolution correction is applied to the q2 and B+(D+ (s)) invariant mass distributions of both normalisation and signal channels. This correction affects the shape of invariant mass distributions and therefore the efficiency of the invariant-mass requirements. The correction is derived assuming that the smearing parameters are independent of the electron pair momentum and the detector occupancy. Due to the stringent requirement on the π+ℓ+ℓ−invariant mass in the trigger, assumptions associated with the resolution in the electron channel constitute one of the largest systematic uncertainties in the measurement. A fit to the dilepton mass distribution without any kinematic constraints is shown in Fig. 4 for signal candidates selected in a narrow mϕ(π+ℓ+ℓ−) window around the known D+ and D+ s masses. The signal shape is divided into categories based on the number of bremsstrahlung photons recovered, each modelled by a double-sided Crystal Ball function. The parameters of these distributions are obtained from a fit to the smeared distributions of simulated candidates. The agreement between the shapes obtained from simulation and the data provides a validation of the resolution description at low q2.
Source ϕπ [%] ϕπ [%]
Resolution on q2 4.0 3.9 Event multiplicity 2.7 2.7 Simulation reweighting 1.5 1.2 Combinatorial background shape parametrisation 1.5 1.0 PID 0.8 0.8 Finite size of control samples 0.8 0.6 Trigger 0.3 0.3 Tracking 0.1 0.1 Background from doubly misidentified electrons 1.1 0.1
Systematic uncertainties
A summary of the systematic uncertainties is given in Table 3. Systematic uncertainties associated with the assumptions in the analysis are determined using variations of the result under alternative methods. The standard deviation of these variations is assigned as a systematic uncertainty. The systematic sources are assumed to be uncorrelated. The assumptions used to correct the imperfect simulation of the dielectron q2 resolution lead to the largest systematic uncertainty in the measurement. The nominal resolution smearing parameters are assumed to be independent of the electron momenta. To account for the systematic uncertainty arising from this assumption, the simulated q2 and B+(D+ (s)) distributions are corrected by measuring the resolution in data for the normalisation channel as a function of the electron pair momentum. In addition, an alternative resolution smearing procedure is used, which depends on the number of hits reconstructed in the SPD. The sample is divided into three equally populated regions according to the number of SPD hits, and separate smearing parameters are obtained for each region. Additional uncertainties arising from the limited precision of the resolution parameters are found to have a negligible effect. The particle multiplicity is mismodelled in the simulation. For example, there are around 10% fewer tracks per event and around 30% fewer hits in the SPD reconstructed in simulation compared to the data. A systematic correction associated to this mismodelling is determined by adding to the initial set of corrections a separate reweighting of three different multiplicity proxies: the number of fully reconstructed tracks, the number of primary vertices reconstructed in the VELO and the number of hits reconstructed in the SPD. Although only weakly correlated between different lepton flavours, this leads to a large systematic uncertainty due to the mismodelling of the SPD multiplicity and the different production mechanisms for the signal and normalisation channels. The final set of corrections is obtained from the muon channels and is applied coherently to both electron and muon channels. A systematic uncertainty based on the assumption that the corrections are independent of lepton flavour is determined by obtaining the corrections from the B+ →K+J/ψ(→e+e−) channel instead. An additional set of mixed corrections is also derived, whereby the production corrections originate from the muon
control channels and the vertex quality and IP χ2 originate from the electron control channels, and are then applied to the signal channel. The impact of the trigger on the weights applied to correct the simulation is determined by varying the trigger requirement for the samples used in those corrections. Three alternative methods for extracting the signal yields are adopted to determine the systematic uncertainty arising from the combinatorial background parameterisation for the electron mode. Firstly, the coefficients describing the combinatorial shape in the fit are constrained to the values obtained from two independent proxies: a sample where the two reconstructed leptons have the same charge and a sample where the BDT requirement is reversed. Secondly, the assumption arising from the truncation of the polynomial is relaxed by increasing it to fourth order. Three systematic sources are considered for the determination of the PID efficiencies: the binning scheme of the PID response as a function of the kinematic variables; the dependence of the PID response on the trigger; and the assumption that the PID response factorises between the two electrons. As the PID selection is highly efficient, these assumptions result in a small systematic uncertainty. A comparably small uncertainty is associated with the tracking efficiency corrections. The limited size of the control samples used to derive corrections to the simulated efficiencies gives rise to an associated systematic uncertainty. The impact of this is determined by bootstrapping [35] the relevant samples and re-computing the associated efficiencies. The 68% envelope of these repeated efficiency determinations is assigned as the systematic uncertainty. The systematic uncertainty associated with the trigger corrections originates from the dependence on the requirement on the tag lepton used in the tag-and-probe method. This is determined by varying this tag requirement, where the largest effects are seen in the hadronic trigger category. The assumption that the trigger efficiencies factorise between the two electrons is also determined by parameterising the trigger response as a function of the distance between the electron clusters in the ECAL. In the nominal signal-yield determination, the estimate of the doubly misidentified background relies on the translation of this background source from the reversed PID region to the signal PID region using the known PID efficiencies. An alternative procedure that does not rely on this method is used to extract the signal yields, and the difference between these results is taken as a systematic uncertainty. In the alternative signal extraction procedure, the expected D+ (s) →π+π−π+contamination is obtained from a fit to the πππ invariant-mass distribution for signal candidates selected in the signal PID region, such that no translation across PID regions is needed. The result of the fit is shown in Fig. 5. In this alternative approach, the contamination of doubly misidentified background events is constrained to the one extracted from the nominal PID region fit. This leads to a comparitavely larger systematic uncertainty for the D+ →π+ϕ mode compared to the s →π+ϕ decay as the misID background peaks in the vicinity of the D+ mass. The small size of this systematic uncertainty confirms the accuracy of data-driven estimates of the misidentified h →e background sources in LFU analyses at low q2.
Candidates / (7.6 MeV/
1700 1800 1900 2000 ) [MeV/ track
components. In this variable the latter are clearly visible in data passing the electron PID criteria.
Results and conclusion
The final results are
ϕπ = 1.026 ± 0.020 (stat) ± 0.056 (syst),
ϕπ = 1.017 ± 0.013 (stat) ± 0.051 (syst).
A combination of the ratios from the two charm hadron decays is obtained by performing a weighted average of the two results, taking into account the correlations
Rϕπ = 1.022 ± 0.012 (stat) ± 0.048 (syst).
This result is combined with the existing ϕ →e+e−branching fraction measurement of (2.979 ± 0.033) × 10−4 [9] to obtain a measurement of
B(ϕ →µ+µ−) = (3.045 ± 0.049 (stat) ± 0.148 (syst)) × 10−4,
This is the most precise measurement of this branching fraction to date. These results are compatible with previous measurements [9] and with lepton flavour universality at less than one standard deviation. Systematic uncertainties related to the efficiency determination are larger than those in the RK and RK∗analyses [1, 2] due to the different production mechanism between the signal and normalisation channels and restrictive invariant mass requirements in the trigger. This restriction only affects the charm decays analysed in this measurement and can be improved in the future. In addition, the variation of the measured value as a function of several kinematic variables is shown in Fig. 6. No significant dependence on these variables is observed. Assuming the fluctuations seen in these variables are attributed to a systematic effect, the maximum deviation in the efficiency is found to be 2.5%, which shows that the efficiency of electrons can be controlled at least at this level for low-mass di-electron signatures.
0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 α(ℓ+ℓ−) [rad]
log[max(pT(ℓ+), pT(ℓ−))/1(MeV/c)]
N (d,s)(φ(e+e−)π+)/N(J/ψ(e+e−)K+)
N (d,s)(φ(e+e−)π+)/N (s)(J/ψ(e+e−)K+)
log[pbrem (e+)/1(MeV/c)]
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 pbrem (e+)/pT(e+)
Similar to the RK(∗) measurements [1,2], the single ratio of the normalisation channel rJ/ψ is determined to cross-check the efficiency correction procedure. This is found to be compatible with the SM at the level of 0.6 sigma and with previous analyses. Such agreement is expected, as a very similar correction procedure is applied in this case. In summary, the branching fraction ratio B(ϕ →µ+µ−)/B(ϕ →e+e−) is determined with D+ →π+ϕ and D+ s →π+ϕ decays, using a dataset corresponding to an integrated luminosity of 5.4 fb−1 of pp collision data collected with the LHCb experiment. The results are consistent with the Standard Model and with previous measurements. This is the first lepton flavour universality test in ϕ meson decays at the LHCb experiment. It probes a unique kinematic region and is crucial for understanding the experimental features of low-mass dileptons in the LHCb environment.
We express our gratitude to our colleagues in the CERN accelerator departments for the excellent performance of the LHC. We thank the technical and administrative staff at the LHCb institutes. We acknowledge support from CERN and from the national agencies: CAPES, CNPq, FAPERJ and FINEP (Brazil); MOST and NSFC (China); CNRS/IN2P3 (France); BMBF, DFG and MPG (Germany); INFN (Italy); NWO (Netherlands); MNiSW and NCN (Poland); MCID/IFA (Romania); MICINN (Spain); SNSF and SER (Switzerland); NASU (Ukraine); STFC (United Kingdom); DOE NP and NSF (USA). We acknowledge the computing resources that are provided by CERN, IN2P3 (France), KIT and DESY (Germany), INFN (Italy), SURF (Netherlands), PIC (Spain), GridPP (United Kingdom), CSCS (Switzerland), IFIN-HH (Romania), CBPF (Brazil), and Polish WLCG (Poland). We are indebted to the communities behind the multiple open-source software packages on which we depend. Individual groups or members have received support from ARC and ARDC (Australia); Key Research Program of Frontier Sciences of CAS, CAS PIFI, CAS CCEPP, Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, and Sci. & Tech. Program of Guangzhou (China); Minciencias (Colombia); EPLANET, Marie Sk lodowska-Curie Actions, ERC and NextGenerationEU (European Union); A*MIDEX, ANR, IPhU and Labex P2IO, and R´egion Auvergne-Rhˆone-Alpes (France); AvH Foundation (Germany); ICSC (Italy); GVA, XuntaGal, GENCAT, Inditex, InTalent and Prog. Atracci´on Talento, CM (Spain); SRC (Sweden); the Leverhulme Trust, the Royal Society and UKRI (United Kingdom).

MONOIDAL QUANTALOIDS
Dedicated to Thomas Vetterlein for his friendship and guidance
GEJZA JENˇCA AND BERT LINDENHOVIUS
Abstract. We investigate how to add a symmetric monoidal structure to quantaloids in a compatible way. In particular, dagger compact quantaloids turn out to have properties that are similar to the category Rel of sets and binary relations. Examples of such quantaloids are the category qRel of quantum sets and binary relations, and the category V -Rel of sets and binary relations with values in a commutative quantale V . For both examples, the process of internalization structures is of interest. Discrete quantization, a process of generalization of mathematical structures to the noncommutative setting can be regarded as the process of internalizing these structures in qRel, whereas fuzzification, the process of introducing degrees of truth or membership to concepts that are traditionally considered either true or false, can be regarded as the process of internalizing structures in V -Rel. Hence, we investigate how to internalize power sets and preordered structures in dagger compact quantaloids.
Introduction Preliminaries Symmetric monoidal and compact quantaloids Dagger kernel quantaloids and orthomodularity Internal maps Internal preorders The embedding of sets Power objects Conclusions and future work

1. Introduction
arXiv:2504.18266v2 [math.CT] 18 Dec 2025
The work we present here evolved from the research on mathematical quantization via quantum relations. Here, mathematical quantization, also briefly called quantization, refers to the process of generalizing mathematical structures to the noncommutative setting, typically in terms of operators on Hilbert spaces. For example, because of Gelfand duality between locally compact Hausdorff spaces and commutative C*-algebras, one can regard general C*algebras as noncommutative generalizations of locally compact Hausdorff spaces, and many theorems on locally compact Hausdorff spaces can be generalized to arbitrary C*-algebras.
2020 Mathematics Subject Classification: 18D20, 18M40, 06F07. Key words and phrases: quantaloids, categorical quantum mechanics, internalization. © Gejza Jenˇca and Bert Lindenhovius, 2025. Permission to copy for private use granted.
This observation is crucial in the program of noncommutative geometry [8], in which the concepts and tools of geometry are generalized to the noncommutative setting. Another example is provided by von Neumann algebras, which can be regarded as noncommutative generalizations of measure spaces. The reason why one could be interested in such noncommutative generalizations is because most quantum phenomena can be described in terms of noncommutative structures. Since many of these phenomena have classical counterparts; noncommutative generalizations of the mathematical structures describing these classical counterparts often can be used to describe the quantum phenomena. For example, complete partial orders (cpos), i.e., posets in which every monotonically ascending sequence has a supremum, can be used to model programming languages with recursion. Recently, cpos were quantized, and the resulting quantum cpos were used to model quantum programming languages with recursion [29,31]. The quantization method employed for the quantization of cpos is called discrete quantization, which is based on a noncommutative generalization of sets and binary relations. The starting point of this approach are quantum relations between von Neumann algebras, introduced by Weaver in [42] and distilled from his joint work with Kuperberg on the quantization of metric spaces [33]. Quantum relations can be regarded as noncommutative analogues of binary measurable relations between measure spaces. As mentioned above, von Neumann algebras are noncommutative generalizations of measure spaces. Just like sets can be regarded as a subclass of measure spaces (by equipping them with the Dirac measure), one can identify a subclass of von Neumann algebras that are noncommutative generalizations of sets. These von Neumann algebras are called hereditarily atomic, and are by definition isomorphic to (possibly infinite) sums of complex-valued matrix algebras [26]. Each such matrix algebra is isomorphic to the algebra B(H) of linear operators on a finite-dimensional Hilbert space H. It follows that every hereditarily atomic von Neumann algebra is isomorphic to a sum L
α∈A B(Hα) for some set-indexed family (Hα)α∈A of finite-dimensional Hilbert spaces. We call such a set-indexed family of finite-dimensional Hilbert spaces a quantum set. Also quantum relations between hereditarily atomic von Neumann algebras correspond to morphisms between quantum sets, which we simply call binary relations between quantum sets, as they are noncommutative generalizations of binary relations between ordinary sets. Even though quantum sets and hereditarily atomic von Neumann algebras contain the same information, we will see that categories of ordinary sets embed covariantly into categories of quantum sets, whereas they embed contravariantly into categories of hereditarily atomic von Neumann algebras. For this reason, as a generalization of sets, quantum sets might feel more natural than hereditarily atomic von Neumann algebras. Quantum sets and binary relations between quantum sets form a category qRel, which is dagger compact and enriched over the category Sup of complete lattices and supremapreserving morphisms. Any category with such an enrichment is called a quantaloid. Because of these properties, qRel admits a well-behaved calculus of relations, including notions of symmetry, antisymmetry, transitivity, and reflexivity. This makes it possible to internalize classical structures within qRel, leading to noncommutative analogues of familiar objects like graphs and posets. In this sense, the process of discrete quantization can be understood
as the internalization of classical structures in qRel. Although a quantization process based on on arbitrary von Neumann algebras, discrete quantization suffices for most applications in quantum information theory and quantum computing. Moreover, the compact structure of qRel enables constructions, such as the quantization of the power set monad, that appear impossible at the level of general von Neumann algebras. The strength of discrete quantization lies further in the fact that it allows one to quantize theories instead of just categories. For instance, in [32], the category of quantum posets was investigated, and many theorems in order theory carry over to the quantum case. Similarly, in [31], ω-complete partial orders (cpos) were quantized, and the category of the resulting quantum cpos was investigated. In practice, in order to prove noncommutative versions of theorems in a theory one tries to quantize via discrete quantization, one sometimes relies on arguments based on the structure of quantum sets. However, more often, one can prove the theorems purely via categorical arguments based on the categorical structure of qRel or WRel. This leads to the question whether we can reduce the proofs completely to categorical arguments. We note that Rel is the prime example of an allegory, a kind of category generalizing Rel introduced in [12], just like topoi generalize Set. Allegories are strongly related to topoi, since the latter are precisely the categories of internal maps in power allegories, i.e., allegories with so-called power objects that generalize power sets. As a consequence, allegories have a rich structure that allow for the systematic internalization of most mathematical structures. However, qRel fails to be an allegory (cf. Example 2.66). Bicategories of relations form another categorical generalization of Rel introduced in [7], but since every bicategory of relations is an allegory, qRel cannot be a bicategory of relations either. Fundamentally, the biggest issue seems to be that the category qSet of internal maps in qRel inherits a monoidal product from qRel that is not cartesian. Hence, we cannot rely on existing categorical frameworks that generalize Rel. Instead we draw inspiration from recent axiomatizations of dagger categories such as the category Hilb of Hilbert spaces and bounded linear maps [15] or the category Rel [28]. Hence, we try to identify the essential categorical properties of qRel that allow for a systematic quantization of most mathematical structures. We also hope that the identification of these properties will be a step in the direction of an eventual axiomatization of qRel. We also draw inspiration from fuzzification, the process of introducing degrees of truth or membership to concepts that are traditionally considered either true or false. Just like quantization, this process can also be regarded as an internalization process in a category that resembles Rel, namely the category V -Rel of sets and binary relations with values in a commutative quantale V , which represents the degrees of truth. One retrieves Rel as a special case of V -Rel by choosing V to be the two-point lattice. There are ample examples of choices of V for which V -Rel is not an allegory, for instance, when V is affine, but not a frame (cf. Example 2.58). We further note that the category V -Rel also plays a role in the field of monoidal topology [19]. Here, one unifies ordered, metric and topological structures in a single framework of lax algebras of lax monads on V -Rel for some suitable quantale V . Thus, the starting point for our work is the categorical structure that is shared by
Rel, qRel and V -Rel, which are both dagger compact categories that are simultaneously quantaloids, i.e., categories enriched over the category Sup of complete lattice and suprema-preserving maps. In the preliminaries, i.e., Section 2, we explore (dagger) symmetric monoidal categories and quantaloids, and biproducts in these categories. In Section 3, we discuss how to combine monoidal structures with a quantaloid structure in a compatible way, leading to the main notions of this paper, which we call a (dagger) symmetric monoidal quantaloids and (dagger) compact quantaloids. We show that the former generalize infinitely distributive (dagger) symmetric monoidal categories with a quantaloid structure. In Section 4, we investigate how to integrate the notion of dagger kernel categories with dagger quantaloids, and how the existence of dagger kernels imply that homsets are orthomodular. In the remaining sections, we internalize various structures. Some of the obtained results were already proven for qRel in [30], but here we reprove those results in the more general framework of dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloids. In Section 5 we describe internal maps in symmetric monoidal quantaloids. In Rel, these correspond to functions, in qRel to unital ∗-homomorphisms (as already known from the work of Kornell [26]). In Section 6, we study internal preorders, monotone maps, and monotone relations. In Section 7, we investigate under what conditions we can embed categories of set-theoretic structures into categories of their internalizations in a dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid. Finally, in Section 8, we use these structures and some extra assumptions to derive the existence of power objects in Section 8. The most important of these assumptions is that the category of internal maps is symmetric monoidal closed. We conclude by investigating when the existence of power objects imply a monoidal closed structure of the internal maps.

2. Preliminaries
In the following, we will give the definitions of compact categories, biproducts and quantaloids. All these concepts can be combined with the notion of a dagger on a category. Moreover, we present two quantaloids, the category V -Rel of sets and binary relations with values in a quantale V , and the category qRel of quantum sets and binary relations between quantum sets, which will provide examples of the material developed in this article.
2.1. Definition. A category C is called a dagger category if it is equipped with a contravariant involutive functor (−)† that is the identity on objects. We refer to this functor as the dagger on C. Furthermore, a morphism f : X →Y in C is called
• a dagger mono if f † ◦f = idX;
• a dagger epi if f ◦f † = idY ;
• a dagger isomorphism or a unitary if it is both a dagger mono and a dagger epi;
• selfadjoint if X = Y and f † = f;
• a projection if X = Y and f ◦f = f = f †.
2.2. Definition. A dagger functor F : C →D between dagger categories is a functor such that for each morphism f : X →Y in C we have F(f †) = (Ff)†. If, in addition, F forms an equivalence of categories with a dagger functor G : D →C such that the natural isomorphisms GFX ∼= X and FGY ∼= Y for X ∈C and Y ∈D are unitaries, then we call F and G an equivalence of dagger categories, and C and D equivalent dagger categories.
2.3. Monoidal categories. We assume the reader is familiar with symmetric monoidal categories. To fix notation, we will write symmetric monoidal categories as (C, ⊗, I), suppressing the associator α, the left and right unitors λ, ρ, and the symmetry σ. We call a symmetric monoidal category (C, ⊗, I) closed if for each object X ∈C the functor C →C, Y 7→X ⊗Y has a right adjoint, in which case we denote the right adjoint by [X, −]. The counit of the adjunction is denoted by EvalX. We denote the Y -component of EvalX by EvalX,Y , which is a morphism EvalX,Y : [X, Y ]⊗X →Y that satisfies the universal property that for any morphism f : Z ⊗X →Y there is a unique morphism ˆf : Z →[X, Y ] such that EvalX,Y ◦( ˆf ⊗idX) = f. Often, we will simply write Eval instead of EvalX,Y . In a symmetric monoidal category, the morphisms with the monoidal unit as codomain play a special role.
2.4. Definition. Let (C, ⊗, I) be a symmetric monoidal category and let X ∈C be an object. Then a morphism e : X →I is called an effect on X.
The dual concept of an effect, i.e., a morphism with the monoidal unit as domain, is usually called a state, but will be of lesser importance in this contribution. Another special role is played by morphisms that are simultaneously states and effects:
2.5. Definition. Let (C, ⊗, I) be a symmetric monoidal category. We call the morphisms s : I →I scalars. For any two objects X and Y , we define (left) scalar multiplication as the operation C(I, I) × C(X, Y ) →C(X, Y ), (s, f) 7→s · f, where s · f := λY ◦(s ⊗f) ◦λ−1 X .
The proof of the following lemma is straightforward.
2.6. Lemma. In a symmetric monoidal category (C, I, ⊗) with a zero object 0 the following statements are equivalent:
(3) there is precisely one scalar.
If (C, ⊗, I) is a symmetric monoidal closed category with a zero object 0 isomorphic to I, it follows for any two objects X and Y of C that C(X, Y ) ∼= C(I, [X, Y ]) ∼= C(0, [X, Y ]) = 1, hence, there is exactly one morphism X →Y . It follows that all objects of C are isomorphic to each other, hence C is equivalent to the trivial category.
2.7. Compact categories. A symmetric monoidal category (C, ⊗, I) is called compact or compact closed if each object X in C has a dual X∗, i.e., an object for which there are morphisms ηX : I →X∗⊗X and ϵX : X ⊗X∗→I, called the unit and the counit, respectively, such that
λX ◦(ϵX ⊗idX) ◦α−1 X,X∗,X ◦(idX ⊗ηX) ◦ρ−1 X = idX, (1)
ρX∗◦(idX∗⊗ϵX) ◦αX∗,X,X∗◦(ηX ⊗idX∗) ◦λ−1 X∗= idX∗ (2)
In particular, any compact category (C, ⊗, I) is symmetric monoidally closed with internal hom [X, Y ] = X∗⊗Y [23]. Let f : X →Y be a morphism in a compact closed category (C, ⊗, I). Then we define its name ⌜f⌝: I →X∗⊗Y and coname ⌞f⌟: X ⊗Y ∗→I as the morphisms
⌜f⌝:= (idX∗⊗f) ◦ηX; ⌞f⌟:= ϵY ◦(f ⊗idY ∗).
2.8. Lemma. Let X and Y be objects in a compact closed category (C, ⊗, I). Then we have bijections
C(X, Y ) =−→C(I, X∗⊗Y ), g 7→⌜g⌝
C(X, Y ) =−→C(X ⊗Y ∗, I), f 7→⌞f⌟,
with respective inverses
C(I, X∗⊗Y ) →C(X, Y ), h 7→λY ◦(⌞idX⌟⊗idY ) ◦α−1 X,Y ∗,X ◦(idX ⊗h) ◦ρX C(X ⊗Y ∗, I) →C(X, Y ), k 7→λY ◦(k ⊗idY ) ◦α−1 X,Y ∗,Y ◦(idX ⊗⌜idY ⌝) ◦ρ−1 X .
Proof. The existence of the bijections between the homsets is a basic result in the theory of compact-closed categories, and is claimed in for instance [23].
Let (C, ⊗, I) be a compact closed category. For each morphism f : X →Y , define f ∗: Y ∗→X∗to be the morphism
f ∗= ρX ◦(idX∗⊗ϵY ) ◦(idX∗⊗(f ⊗idY ∗)) ◦αX∗,X,Y ∗◦(ηX ⊗idY ∗) ◦λ−1 Y ∗.
Then the assignment X 7→X∗on objects becomes a functor C →Cop by defining its action on morphisms f : X →Y by f 7→f ∗. Moreover, the functors idC : C →C and (−)∗∗: C →C are natural isomorphic.
2.9. Dagger compact categories. A dagger symmetric monoidal category is a symmetric monoidal category (C, ⊗, I) that is also a dagger category in such a way that (f ⊗g)† = f † ⊗g† for all morphisms f and g, and such that the associator, unitors and symmetry are unitaries. If, in addition, (C, ⊗, I) is compact and satisfies σA,A∗◦ϵ† A = ηA, then we call (C, ⊗, I) a dagger compact category.
2.10. Definition. Let (C, ⊗, I) and (D, ⊙, J) be symmetric monoidal categories. Then a symmetric monoidal functor F : D →C is a functor F : D →C for which there are coherence morphisms φ : I →FJ and φX,Y : FX ⊗FY →F(X ⊙Y ) for each X, Y ∈D such that
FαX,Y,Z ◦φX⊙Y,Z ◦(φX,Y ⊗idFZ) = φX,Y ⊙Z ◦(idFY ⊗φY,Z) ◦αFX,FY,FZ (3) FλY ◦φJ,Y ◦(φ ⊗idFY ) = λFY (4) FρX ◦φX,J ◦(idFX ⊗φ) = ρFX (5) FσX,Y ◦φX,Y = φY,X ◦σFX,FY . (6)
for objects X, Y, Z of D. If all coherence morphisms are isomorphisms, we call F strong. If, in addition, (C, ⊗, I) and (D, ⊙, J) are dagger symmetric monoidal categories, and the coherence morphisms are unitaries, we call F a dagger strong symmetric monoidal functor. If all coherence morphisms are identities, then F is called strict.
2.11. Lemma. Let f : X →Y be a morphism in a dagger compact category (C, ⊗, I). Then
(f ∗)† = (f †)∗; ϵY ◦(f ⊗idY ∗) = ϵX ◦(idX ⊗f ∗); (idX∗⊗f) ◦ηX = (f ∗⊗idY ) ◦ηY .
Proof. For the first equality, see [16, Lemma 3.55]. For the remaining equalities, see Equation (3.10) in Lemma 3.12 of [16].
Finally, dagger compact categories enjoy the property of having a trace.
2.12. Definition. Let (C, ⊗, I) be a dagger compact category. For each object X ∈C, we denote the map C(X, X) →C(I, I), f 7→ϵX ◦(f ⊗idX∗)◦ϵ† X by TrX(f), or simply by Tr(f).
We record the following properties of the trace:
2.13. Proposition. [16, Lemmas 3.61 & 3.63] Let (C, ⊗, I) be a dagger compact category. Then:
(a) TrI(s) = s for any scalar s : I →I;
(b) TrX(0X) = 0I for any object X of C if C has a zero object;
(c) TrX⊗Y (f ⊗g) = Tr(f)X ◦TrY (g) for any morphisms f : X →X and g : Y →Y ;
(d) TrX(g ◦f) = TrY (f ◦g) for any morphisms f : X →Y and g : Y →X.
2.14. Definition. Let (C, ⊗, I) be a dagger compact category. Then we define the dimension dim(X) of an object X of C to be the scalar Tr(idX).
2.15. Biproducts. Given a zero object 0 in a category C, we denote by 0X,Y the unique morphism X →Y that factors via 0. If X = Y , we write often 0X instead of 0X,X. Moreover, we define δX,Y : X →Y to be the morphism in C given by
idX, X = Y ; 0X,Y , X ̸= Y.
If (Xα)α∈A is a set-indexed family of objects in C, we often will write δα,β instead of δXα,Xβ for α, β ∈A.
2.16. Definition. Let C be a category with a zero object 0. We say that a set-indexed family (Xα)α∈A of objects in C has a biproduct if there exists an object L
α∈A Xα →Xβ and iXβ : Xβ →L
α∈A Xα and morphisms pXβ : L
α∈A Xα is the product of (Xα)α∈A with canonical projections pXα;
α∈A Xα is the coproduct of (Xα)α∈A with canonical injections iXα;
• pXβ ◦iXα = δXα,Xβ for each α, β ∈A.
If, in addition, C is a dagger category, we call L
α∈A Xα the dagger biproduct of (Xα)α∈A if the following condition is satisfied:
• p† Xα = iXα for each α ∈A.
If we only consider the biproduct of a single set-indexed family (Xα)α∈A of objects instead of biproducts of several families, we sometimes write pα, iα and δα,β instead of pXα, iXα and δXα,Xβ, respectively, for α, β ∈A. Given set-indexed families (Xα)α∈A and (Yα)α∈A of objects in a category R with small biproducts, and morphisms fα : Xα →Yα for each α ∈A, we have Q
α∈A fα, which we will denote by L
2.17. Definition. We say that a (dagger) category C has small (dagger) biproducts if it has a zero object and the (dagger) biproduct of any set-indexed family of objects in C exists.
2.18. Definition. Given an object X of a category C with small biproducts, and given an index set A, we denote the morphisms ⟨idX⟩α∈A : X →L
α∈A X and [idX]α∈A : L
α∈A X → X by ∆A X and ∇A X, respectively. If no confusion is possible, we drop subscripts and/or superscripts.
The proofs of the following lemmas are straightforward.
2.19. Lemma. Let R be a pointed category and let (Xα)α∈A be a set-indexed family of objects in R whose biproduct exists. Then for each β ∈A, we have pβ = [δα,β]α∈A and iα = ⟨δα,β⟩β∈A
2.20. Lemma. Let C be a category with biproducts, let (Xα)α∈A be a set-indexed family of objects in C, and let X = L
α∈A Xα. Let Y ∈C, and for each α ∈A, let fα : Y →Xα and gα : Xα →Y be morphisms. Then ⟨fα⟩α∈A =
α∈A fα ◦∆and [gα]α∈A = ∇◦
2.21. Superposition rule. Let R be a category with all small biproducts. Given objects X and Y in R and a set-indexed family (fα)α∈A of morphisms X →Y , we define the morphism P
Furthermore, given f1, f2 ∈R(X, Y ), we define f1 + f2 : X →Y by
The first two properties in the next proposition express that homsets in a category R with all small biproducts form complete monoids in the sense of Laird [35], which is a generalization of the notion of Σ-monoids introduced by Haghverdi [13] to the uncountable case. Combined with the sixth property, these properties express that R is enriched over the category of complete monoids and sum-preserving maps, which is proven in [35, Proposition 2.3]. The proof of the remaining properties is straightforward; the essential steps are the same in the more familiar case of finitely-indexed families of morphisms. We note that complete monoids are also studied by Andr´es-Mart´ınez and Heunen [1].
2.22. Proposition. Let R be a category with small biproducts, and let X and Y be objects of R. Then for any set-indexed family (fα)α∈A of morphisms X →Y , we have
α∈A fα = fβ if A is the singleton {β};
α∈k−1[{β}] fα for each function k : A →B;
β∈A fk(β) for each bijection k : A →A;
α∈A\B fα for each B ⊆A such that fβ = 0X,Y for each β ∈B;
(6) For each object Z and morphism g : Y →Z and h : Z →X, we have
2.23. Corollary. Let C be a category with all small biproducts, and let (Xα)α∈A be a collection of objects in C. Then idL α∈A Xα = P
Proof. For each β ∈A we have pβ ◦P
α∈A iα ◦pα = idL α∈A Xα.
α∈A δα,β ◦pα = pβ, whence we must have P
2.24. Matrices. Let R be a category with small biproducts. Let (Xα)α∈A and (Yβ)β∈B be collections of objects in R, and for each α ∈A and β ∈B let fα,β be a morphism Xα →Yβ. Then we define the morphism (fα,β)α∈A,β∈B : L
α∈A,β∈B iYβ ◦fα,β ◦pXα.
For simplicity, we will sometimes write (fα,β)α,β instead of (fα,β)α∈A,β∈B. If f = (fα,β)α∈A,β∈B, we will refer to (fα,β)α∈A,β∈B as the matrix corresponding to f; the morphisms fα,β are called matrix elements of f. The following lemma is an infinite version of Lemma 2.26 and Corollary 2.27 of [16]. Except for working with a possibly infinite index-set instead of a finite one, the proof is the same.
2.25. Lemma. Let R be a category with small biproducts, let (Xα)α∈A and (Yβ)β∈B be families of objects in R. Then any morphism f : L
β∈B Yβ has a corresponding matrix, i.e., f = (fα,β)α∈A,β∈B with matrix elements
fα,β := pYβ ◦f ◦iXα.
Moreover, f is uniquely determined by its matrix elements.
β∈B Yβ be a morphism. Then
2.26. Lemma. Let R be a category with small biproducts, let (Xα)α∈A and (Yβ)β∈B be families of objects in R, and let f : L
Proof. By Lemma 2.25, we have f = P
α∈A,β∈B iYβ ◦fα,β ◦pXα. The statements now follow directly from (6) of Proposition 2.22 and from the definition of biproducts.
The following lemma is an infinite version of [16, Proposition 2.28]. Its practically the same.
2.27. Lemma. Let R be a category with small biproducts, and let (Xα)α∈A, (Yβ)β∈B and (Zγ)γ∈C be collections of objects in R. Let f : L
γ∈C Zγ be morphisms with matrices (fα,β)α∈A,β∈B and (gβ,γ)β∈B,γ∈C, respectively. Then
2.28. Lemma. Let R be a category with all small biproducts, and let (Xα)α∈A be a collection of objects in R. Then the (α, β)-matrix entry of idL α∈A Xα is given by (idL α∈A Xα)α,β = δα,β.
Proof. By Lemma 2.25, we have (idL γ∈A Xγ)α,β = pβ ◦idL γ∈A Xγ ◦iα = pβ ◦iα = δα,β.
2.29. Dagger biproducts. If a dagger category has small dagger biproducts, we can calculate the adjoint of matrices as follows.
2.30. Proposition. Let R be a dagger category with small dagger biproducts. Let f = (fα,β)α∈A,β∈B : L
β∈B Yβ be a morphism in R. Then for each α ∈A and each β ∈B, we have (f †)β,α = (fα,β)†.
2.31. Lemma. Let R be a dagger category with all dagger biproducts. For any two families (Xα)α∈A and (Yα)α∈A, and for any set-indexed family of morphisms (rα : Xα →Yβ)α∈A, we have
2.32. Proposition. Let R be a dagger category with all small dagger biproducts. Let Y be an object of R, and let (Xα)α∈A be a set-indexed family of objects in R with dagger biproduct X. For each α ∈A, let rα : Xα →Y be a morphism in R, and let r := [rα]α∈A : X →Y . Then
(a) [rα]† α∈A = ⟨r† α⟩α∈A;
(c) (r† ◦r)α,β = r† β ◦rα for each α, β ∈A;
(d) ∆A Y = (∇A Y )†.
2.33. Distributivity. A symmetric monoidal category (C, ⊗, I) is called infinitely distributive symmetric monoidal if it has all small coproducts and for each object X ∈C and each set-indexed family (Yα)α∈A of objects in C the canonical morphism
is an isomorphism. The following proposition is a standard result in category theory.
2.34. Proposition. Any symmetric monoidal closed category (C, ⊗, I) with all small coproducts is an infinitely distributive symmetric monoidal category.
2.35. Corollary. Any compact closed category with all small coproducts is infinitely distributive symmetric monoidal.
The next proposition is a generalization of [16, Lemma 3.22], and its proof is essentially the same.
2.36. Proposition. Let (R, ⊗, I) be an infinitely distributive symmetric monoidal category with all small biproducts. For each X, Y, Z, W ∈R, each morphism f : X →W, and each set-indexed family (gα)α∈A of morphisms Y →Z, we have
2.37. Lemma. Let (R, ⊗, I) be an infinitely distributive symmetric monoidal category with small biproducts. For any set-indexed family (sα)α∈A of scalars, and for any any morphism f : X →Y in R, we have P
α∈A (λY ◦(sα ⊗f) ◦λ−1 X ) =
where we used Proposition 2.36 in the second equality, and Proposition 2.22 in the penultimate equality.
2.38. Quantales. Before we discuss quantaloids, we define quantales, which are partially ordered structures that can be regarded as quantum generalizations of locales, and they provide the right setting for describing graded or weighted notions of relation, such as fuzzy membership.
2.39. Definition. A quantale (V, ·, e) consists of a complete lattice V equipped with an associative operation (x, y) 7→x·y, called the multiplication, and a neutral element e for the multiplication such that
for each set-indexed family (xα)α∈A of elements in V and each y ∈V . We denote the least and greatest element of V by ⊥and ⊤, respectively. If, in addition, V is equipped with a dagger, i.e., a map (−)† : V →V such that for each x, y ∈V :
• x ≤y implies x† ≤y†;
• (x · y)† = y† · x†,
then we call V a dagger quantale.
In this work, quantales are always assumed to be unital, whereas some authors use the term ‘quantale’ for the non-unital notion and treat the unital case as a special case. We also note that in the literature, dagger quantales are called ∗-quantales or involutive quantales, see for instance [18]. Because daggers play a crucial role in this work, we decided to deviate from the standard terminology.
2.40. Definition. We call a quantale (V, ·, e):
• nontrivial if ⊤̸=⊥;
• affine or integral if e = ⊤;
• commutative if x · y = y · x for each x, y ∈V ;
• idempotent if x · x = x for each x ∈V .
It is straightforward to see that a quantale V is commutative if and only if the identity map on V is an involution.
2.41. Example. When equipped with the order and multiplication inherited from the real numbers, 2 := {0, 1} is a commutative, affine idempotent quantale, and [0, 1] is a commutative affine quantale.
The proofs of the following two lemmas are straightforward.
2.42. Lemma. Let (V, ·, e) be a quantale. Then ⊥· x =⊥= x · ⊥for each x ∈V .
2.43. Lemma. Let (V, ·, e) be a quantale. Then V is nontrivial if and only if e ̸=⊥.
Frames are special cases of quantales as follows from the following well-known result (see for instance [5, Corollary 2], but note that the authors already assume idempotency in the definition of a quantale):
2.44. Lemma. An affine and idempotent quantale (V, ·, e) is a frame with x ∧y = x · y for each x, y ∈V . In particular, (V, ·, e) is commutative.
2.45. Quantaloids. Next, we review the definition of quantaloids and some basic properties. A quantaloid is a category Q in which every homset is a complete lattice such that composition or morphisms preserves suprema in both arguments separately. A homomorphism of quantaloids is a functor F : Q →R between quantaloids that preserves the suprema of parallel morphisms, i.e., for each set-indexed family (fα)α∈A of morphisms in a homset Q(X, Y ), we have F(W
α∈A F(fα). If, in addition, there is a functor G : R →Q such that F and G form an equivalence of categories, then we call F an equivalence of quantaloids, and we say that Q and R equivalent quantaloids. We note that the functor G is automatically an homomorphism of quantaloids. Indeed, if we denote the natural isomorphism FG →idR by ϵ, then the inverse of the bijection R(X, Y ) →Q(GX, GY ), g 7→Gg is the map Q(GX, GY ) →R(X, Y ), f 7→ϵY ◦Ff ◦ϵ−1 X , which preserves suprema because f 7→Ff preserves suprema for F is a homomorphism of quantaloids, and because composition in R preserves suprema. It is a standard result that the inverse of a supremum-preserving bijection between complete lattices also preserves suprema, which shows that G is a homomorphism of quantaloids. The following example shows that quantaloids are obtained as oidificiations of quantales.
2.46. Example. Given a quantale V , we denote by V the quantaloid with a single object 1 whose single homset is given by V(1, 1) = V . Composition is defined by V(1, 1) × V(1, 1) → V(1, 1), (x, y) 7→x · y. Furthermore, we have id1 = e. As a special case, obtain 2 from the quantale 2 = {0, 1}.
2.47. Example. [11, Section 2.1] Let Sup be the category of complete lattices and supremumpreserving maps. Given two complete lattices X and Y , the (external) homset Sup(X, Y ) is a complete lattice when ordered pointwise. It is straightforward to show that composition in Sup preserves suprema in each argument separately, hence Sup is a quantaloid. Moreover, (Sup, ⊗, 2) is a symmetric monoidal category, where 2 is the two-point lattice {0, 1}, and for complete lattices X and Y , we define X ⊗Y := Sup(X, Y op)op. The internal hom is given by the external hom. As a consequence, Sup is enriched over itself [4, Proposition 6.2.6]. In fact, quantaloids are precisely the categories that are enriched over Sup.
Our next example generalizes the category Rel of sets and binary relations in a natural way, motivated for instance by fuzzy mathematics, is to allow relations whose values are taken not just in the two-element set of truth values, but in a quantale V . Taking V = 2 (cf. Example 2.41) yields Rel.
2.48. Example. [19] Let V be a quantale. Let A and B be sets. Then a function r : A × B →V is called a V -valued relation or simply a V -relation from A to B, in which case we write r : A −7→B. Sets and V -valued relations form a category V -Rel if we define the composition s • r of V -valued relations r : A −7→B and s : B −7→C by
β∈B r(α, β) · s(β, γ),
and the identity morphism on a set A as the V -relation eA : A −7→A defined by
V -Rel becomes a quantaloid if we order parallel V -valued relations r, s : A −7→B by r ≤s if and only if r(α, β) ≤s(α, β) for each α ∈A and β ∈B. The supremum W
κ∈K rκ of any set-indexed family (rκ)κ∈K of parallel V -valued relations A −7→B is calculated via
for each α ∈A and each β ∈B.
The following example will be fundamental for the definition of a quantum set.
2.49. Example. We define the category FdOS0 as the category whose objects are finitedimensional Hilbert spaces; any morphism V : X →Y between objects X and Y of FdOS0 is a subspace V ⊆B(X, Y ). Since X and Y are finite-dimensional, so is B(X, Y ), whence such V is closed, hence an operator space. Given another object Z ∈FdOS0 and an operator space W : Y →Z, the composition W · V : X →Z of V with W is defined as the operator space span{wv : w ∈W, v ∈V }. FdOS0 becomes a quantaloid if we order its homsets by inclusion. The identity operator space idX on the object X is given by C1X, where 1X : X →X is the identity operator on X, so the identity morphism on X regarded as object of the category
FdHilb of finite-dimensional Hilbert spaces and linear maps. The supremum W
α∈A Vα of a set-indexed family (Vα)α∈A of parallel operator spaces X →Y is given by span
α∈A Vα We denote the full subcategory of FdOS0 of all nonzero finite-dimensional Hilbert spaces by FdOS, which is also a quantaloid because it is a full subcategory of FdOS0.
The proof of the next lemma is straightforward.
2.50. Lemma. Let F : Q →R be a faithful homomorphism of quantaloids. Then, for each X and Y in Q, the map FX,Y : Q(X, Y ) →R(FX, FY ), f 7→Ff is an order embedding. If, in addition, F is full, then FX,Y is an order isomorphism.
Since homsets of quantaloids are complete lattices, the following definition makes sense:
2.51. Definition. Let Q be a quantaloid. For any two objects X and Y , we denote the largest and least element of Q(X, Y ) by ⊤X,Y and ⊥X,Y , respectively. We write ⊤X instead of ⊤X,X, and ⊥X instead of ⊥X,X.
The proofs of the next lemmas are all straightforward if one uses that ⊥X,Y = W ∅X,Y , where ∅X,Y denotes the empty subset of Q(X, Y ) in a quantaloid Q.
2.52. Lemma. Let X, Y , and Z be objects in a quantaloid Q, and let f : X →Y and g : Y →Z be morphisms in Q. Then ⊥Y,Z ◦f =⊥X,Z and g◦⊥X,Y =⊥X,Z.
2.53. Lemma. Let Q be a quantaloid with a zero object 0. Then for any two objects X and Y , we have 0X,Y =⊥X,Y .
2.54. Lemma. Let F : Q →R be a homomorphism of quantaloids, and let X and Y be objects in Q. Then F(⊥X,Y ) =⊥FX,FY . If, in addition, both Q and R have a zero object, then we have F(0X,Y ) = 0FX,FY .
2.55. Dagger quantaloids. When a mathematical object is endowed with multiple structures, these structures often required to be mutually compatible. For instance, a topological group is not just a group with a topology, but one also requires that the group operations are continuous. Another example is the definition of a dagger compact category above, where the unit and counit of the compact structure are required to be related to each other via the dagger operation. In the same way, we aim to describe how to combine the concepts of quantaloids and of dagger compact categories. We start with the combination of dagger categories and quantaloids:
2.56. Definition. A dagger quantaloid is a quantaloid Q that is at the same time a dagger category, such that for each two objects X and Y in Q the bijection
Q(X, Y ) =−→Q(Y, X), r 7→r†
is an order isomorphism.
Note that since the dagger is involutive and a bijection on homsets, we could also have required that (−)† is monotone, or that it preserves arbitrary suprema. In the literature, dagger quantaloids are often called ∗-quantaloids or involutive quantaloids, see for instance [17].
2.57. Example. Let V be a dagger quantale. Then the quantaloid V from Example 2.46 is a dagger quantaloid, where the dagger on V(1, 1) →V(1, 1), v 7→v† is the dagger V →V , v 7→v† on V .
2.58. Example. Let V be a dagger quantale. Then V -Rel (cf. Example 2.48) is a dagger quantaloid where the dagger r† : B −7→A of a V -valued relation r : A −7→B is the V -valued relation (β, α) 7→r(α, β)†. We are in particular interested in the case that V is commutative. If, in addition, V is affine, but not a frame, then V -Rel is not an allegory. Indeed, it follows from Lemma 2.44 that V cannot be idempotent, so there must be some v ∈V such that v · v ̸= v. Since V is affine, we have v ≤e, hence v · v ≤v · e = v, hence, we must have v ≰v · v. Now, we cannot have v ≤v · v · v, because otherwise v ≤v · v · v ≤v · v · e = v · v. As a consequence, taking r : 1 −7→1 in V -Rel given by r(∗, ∗) = v, we cannot have r ≤r • r† • r, which should hold in an allegory [20, Lemma A.3.2.1].
2.59. Example. FdOS and FdOS0 (cf. Example 2.49) become dagger quantaloids if for each morphism V : X →Y we define V † : Y →X by V † = {v† : v ∈V }, where v† : Y →X denotes the adjoint of the operator v : X →Y .
2.60. Definition. A homomorphism of dagger quantaloids is a homomorphism of quantaloids F : Q →R between two dagger quantaloids Q and R that is also a dagger functor. If, in addition, there is a dagger functor G : R →Q such that F and G form an equivalence of dagger categories, we call Q and R equivalent dagger quantaloids.
In the quantaloid literature such as [39], biproducts are also called direct sums, and can be characterized in the following way.
2.61. Proposition. [39, Proposition 8.3] Let (Xα)α∈A be a set-indexed family of objects in a quantaloid Q. Let X be an object of Q. Then the following statements are equivalent:
(a) X is the product of (Xα)α∈A with canonical projections pα : X →Xα for each α ∈A;
(b) X is the coproduct of (Xα)α∈A with canonical injections iα : Xα →X for each α ∈A;
(c) X is the biproduct of (Xα)α∈A with canonical projections pα : X →Xα and canonical injections iα : Xα →X for each α ∈A;
(d) For each α ∈A there are morphisms pα : X →Xα, iα : Xα →X such that W
α∈A iα ◦ pα = idX and such that pβ ◦iα = δα,β for each α, β ∈A,
in which case the following identities hold:
• pβ = [δα,β]α∈A for each β ∈A;
• iα = ⟨δα,β⟩β∈A for each α ∈A;
α∈A iα ◦fα for each object Y of Q and each family (fα : Y →Xα)α∈A of morphisms;
α∈A gα ◦pα for each object Y of Q and each family (gα : Xα →Y )α∈A of morphisms.
The next proposition is an infinite version of [16, Lemma 2.21], but the proof is essentially the same.
2.62. Proposition. Let Q be a quantaloid with small biproducts. For objects X and Y in Q, let (fα)α∈A be a set-indexed family in Q(X, Y ). Then P
With the previous two proposition, the proof of the next proposition is straightforward.
2.63. Proposition. Let Q be a quantaloid with small biproducts. Let X ∈Q, and let (Yα)α∈A, (Zα)α∈A and (Wβ)β∈B be set-indexed families of objects in Q.
(a) Given parallel morphisms rα, sα : X →Yα for each α ∈A, we have rα ≤sα for each α ∈A if and only if ⟨rα⟩α∈A ≤⟨sα⟩α∈A;
(b) Given parallel morphisms rα, sβ : Yα →X for each α ∈A, we have rα ≤sα for each α ∈A if and only if [rα]α∈A ≤[sα]α∈A.
(c) Given parallel morphism rα, sα : Yα →Zα for each α ∈A, we have rα ≤sα for each α ∈A if and only if L
(d) Given parallel morphisms r, s : L
β∈B Wβ, we have r ≤s if and only if rα,β ≤sα,β for each α ∈A and each β ∈B.
2.64. Proposition. Let Q and R both be (dagger) quantaloids with small (dagger) biproducts. If F : Q →R is a homomorphism of (dagger) quantaloids, then F preserves (dagger) biproducts.
Proof. This follows directly from the alternative characterization of biproducts in Proposition 2.61.
2.65. Proposition. [18, Example 3.7] Let Q be a quantaloid. Then we define a new quantaloid Matr(Q) whose objects are set-indexed families (Xα)α∈A where Xα is an object of Q for each α ∈A. A morphism f : X →Y where X = (Xα)α∈A and Y = (Yβ)β∈B are objects of Matr(Q) is a ‘matrix’ of morphisms in Q. To be more precise, f is a set-indexed family (f β α)(α,β)∈A×B where f β α : Xα →Yβ is a morphism in Q. The composition with a morphism g : Y →Z where Z = (Zγ)γ∈C is an object in Matr(Q) is defined via
for each (α, γ) ∈A × C. For α, β ∈A, the (α, β)-entry (idX)β α of the identity morphism idX on X is given by
idXα, α = β, ⊥Xα,Xβ, α ̸= β.
We order parallel morphisms f, g : X →Y for objects X = (Xα)α∈A and Y = (Yβ)β∈B of Matr(Q) by f ≤g if and only if (fα)β ≤gβ α for each (α, β) ∈A × B. Clearly, the supremum
γ∈C fγ of any set-indexed family (fγ)γ∈C of morphisms X →Y is then determined by
for each (α, β) ∈A × B. Finally, if Q is a dagger quantaloid, then so is Matr(Q), if for each morphism f : (Xα)α∈A →(Yβ)β∈B in Matr(Q) we define f † by (f †)α β := (f β α)† for each (β, α) ∈B × A.
2.66. Example. Recall the dagger quantaloid FdOS (cf. Examples 2.49 and 2.59). We denote the quantaloid Matr(FdOS) by qRel. Its objects are called quantum sets, typically denoted by calligraphic letters X, Y, Z. The index set of a quantum set X is typically denoted by At(X), whose elements are called the atoms of X, so X = (Xα)α∈At(X) For any natural number n, we denote the quantum set (C)n i=1 by n. The morphisms of qRel are called binary relations between quantum sets. qRel is no allegory, because its full subcategory FdOS is not an allegory, which can be seen as follows. Let H be a finite-dimensional Hilbert space and let a : H →H be an invertible linear map that is not a unitary map. Then a† ̸= a−1.
For instance, let H = C2, and let a =
. The inverse of a is a−1 =
clearly is not equal to a†. Let V, W ⊆B(H) be given by V = Ca and W = Ca−1. Then V and W are automorphisms of H in FdOS, and V · W = C1H and W · V = C1H, so W = V −1 in FdOS. However, it follows from [20, Lemma A.3.2.3] that f −1 = f † for any invertible morphism f in an allegory, and since a−1 ̸= a†, we have V −1 ̸= V †, so FdOS cannot be an allegory.
The matrix-like composition of V -valued relations suggest that V -Rel is the biproduct completion of a quantaloid.
2.67. Proposition. Let V be a (dagger) quantale. Define FV : V -Rel →Matr(V) by A 7→(1)α∈A on objects and by r 7→(r(α, β))(α,β)∈A×B on morphisms r : A −7→B. Define GV : Matr(V) →V -Rel to be the functor that is defined on objects by (1)α∈A 7→A and that maps morphisms (f β α)(α,β)∈A×B : (1)α∈A →(1)β∈B to the V -valued relation A −7→B, (α, β) 7→f β α. Then FV and GV are homomorphisms of (dagger) quantaloids and form an isomorphism of categories, hence V -Rel and Matr(V) are equivalent (dagger) quantaloids.
Recall that in Rel, biproducts are given by U
α∈A Aκ = {(κ, α) : κ ∈K, α ∈Aκ}. Also Matr(Q) has all small biproducts. In fact, we have:
2.68. Theorem. [39, p.43] Let Q be a (dagger) quantaloid. Then Matr(Q) is the universal (dagger) biproduct completion of Q:
κ∈K Aκ. For each λ ∈K, the canonical
• The (dagger) biproduct X of a set-indexed family (Xκ)κ∈K in Matr(Q) with Xκ = (Xκ,α)α∈Aκ is given by (Xκ,α)(κ,α)∈A with A = L
projection pλ : X →Xλ and canonical injection iλ are given by
idXκ,α, λ = κ, α = β, ⊥Xκ,α,Xλ,β, otherwise,
idXκ,α, λ = κ, α = β, ⊥Xλ,β,Xκ,α, otherwise,
for each (κ, α) ∈A and each β ∈Aλ.
• There is a fully faithful homomorphism of (dagger) quantaloids EQ : Q →Matr(Q) sending each X of Q to the family (Xα)α∈1 with X∗= X, and which sends each morphism f : X →Y to (f β α)(α,β)∈1×1 with f ∗ ∗= f.
• Given any other (dagger) quantaloid R with small (dagger) biproducts, and given any homomorphism of (dagger) quantaloids F : Q →R, there is a homomorphism of (dagger) quantaloids F : Matr(Q) →R that is unique up to natural isomorphism such that the following diagram commutes up to natural isomorphism:
namely the functor that maps any object (Xα)α∈A in Matr(Q) to L
α∈A,β∈B iYβ ◦f β α ◦pXα.
α∈A Xα in R and that maps morphisms (f β α)(α,β)∈A×B : (Xα)α∈A →(Yβ)β∈B to W
• If Q already has all small (dagger) biproducts, then Q and Matr(Q) are equivalent (dagger) quantaloids via EQ and PQ := idQ.
• Matr is functorial: for each homomorphism of (dagger) quantaloids F : Q →R, we define Matr(F) := ER ◦F. Explicitly, Matr(F) maps objects (Xα)α∈A in Matr(Q) to (FXα)α∈A in Matr(R), and morphisms (f β α)(α,β)∈A×B : (Xα)α∈A →(Yβ)β∈B in Matr(Q) to (Ff β α)(α,β)∈A×B in Matr(R). The homomorphism Matr(F) is faithful if F is faithful and full if F is full.
2.69. Example. Since for any (dagger) quantale V , the quantaloid Matr(V) has all small (dagger) biproducts, it follows from Proposition 2.67 that the category V -Rel likewise has all small (dagger) biproducts. Specifically, the (dagger) biproduct of a set-indexed family (Aκ)κ∈K of sets is the disjoint union A := U
κ∈K Aκ, so A = {(κ, α) : κ ∈K, α ∈A}. For each κ ∈K, the canonical injection iκ : Aκ −7→A and the canonical projection pκ : A −7→Aκ
are the V -relations given by
β = (κ, α), otherwise,
β = (κ, α), otherwise,
for each α ∈Aκ and each β ∈A.
2.70. Dagger kernels. Let R be a dagger category. If the equalizer e of two parallel morphisms f, g : X →Y exists and can be chosen to be a dagger mono, then we call it a dagger equalizer. In addition, assume that R has a zero object. If the dagger equalizer k : Kf →X of a morphism f : X →Y and 0X,Y exists, then we call k a dagger kernel of f, in which case we write ker(f) := k. Sometimes we just write K instead of Kf. If every morphism in R has a dagger kernel, we call R a dagger kernel category or we say that R has dagger kernels. We note that to show that k : K →X is the dagger equalizer of some morphisms f, g : X →Y in a dagger category, it suffices to show that for each morphism m : Z →K with f ◦m = g ◦m, there is some morphism h : Z →K with k ◦h = m. Uniqueness of h follows automatically because k is a dagger mono. The notion in the following definition is originally due to Heunen and Jacobs [6].
2.71. Definition. Let C be a category with a zero object. A morphism m : Y →Z in C is called a zero-mono if m ◦f = 0X,Z implies f = 0X,Y for each object X of C and each morphism f : X →Y . Dually, a morphism e : X →Y is called a zero-epi if for each morphism f : Y →Z we have that f ◦e = 0X,Z implies f = 0Y,Z.
In dagger kernel categories, zero-monos have an alternative description: The next lemma is a slight variation of [6, Lemma 4].
2.72. Lemma. Let R be a dagger category with a zero object 0. Then a morphism m : X →Y is a zero-mono if and only if its dagger kernel ker(m) exists and is the morphism 00,X : 0 →X.
Let X be an object in a dagger kernel category. Two monomorphisms m1 : S1 →X and m2 : S2 →X are called equivalent if there is some isomorphism f : S1 →S2 such that m1 = m2 ◦f, in which case we write m1 ∼m2. Then ∼is an equivalence relation; an equivalence class of a monomorphism m : S →X under ∼is called a subobject of X, and is denoted by [m]. Since we assume all our categories to be wellpowered, the class Sub(X) of subobjects of X is a set, and is actually a poset if we ordered it via [m1] ≤[m2] if there is some morphism f : S1 →S2 such that m1 = m2 ◦f for monomorphisms m1 : S1 →X and m2 : S2 →X. By definition, any dagger kernel k : K →X is a monomorphism, so a representative of a subobject of X. Let k1 : K1 →X and k2 : K2 →X be dagger kernels such that [k1] ≤[k2] in Sub(X), so there is some morphism f : K1 →K2 such that k1 = k2 ◦f. It is shown
in [6, Lemma 1] that f is a dagger kernel, so in particular it is a dagger mono. We write k1 ∼k2 if k1 and k2 are equivalent monomorphisms with codomain X, so k1 = k2◦m for some isomorphism m : K1 →K2, in which case it immediately follows that m−1 = m† ◦m◦m−1 = m†, so m is a dagger isomorphism. The set KSub(X) of equivalence classes of dagger kernels with codomain X under ∼is contained in Sub(X), and becomes a poset when equipped with the order inherited from Sub(X). We will use the following lemma several times.
2.73. Lemma. [6, Proposition 7] Let f : X →Y be a morphism in a dagger kernel category C, and let k : K →Y be the dagger kernel of f † : Y →X. Then f = ker(k†) ◦e for some zero-epi e : X →K.
Dagger kernels have the following nondegeneracy property:
2.74. Lemma. [16, Lemma 2.49] Let C be a dagger kernel category. Then for each morphism f : X →Y , we have f † ◦f = 0X if and only if f = 0X,Y .
2.75. Proposition. [6, Lemma 1, Lemma 2, Proposition 1] Let R be a dagger kernel category. Then KSub(X) is an orthomodular lattice if we define the orthocomplement ¬[k] of [k] for a dagger kernel k : K →X by ¬[k] = [k⊥], where k⊥:= ker(k†), whose domain is denoted by K⊥. The pullback K of any two dagger kernels k1 : K1 →X and k2 : K2 →X exists, and if k : K →X denotes the induced map by composing the the pullback maps with k1 and k2, then k is a dagger kernel such that [k1] ∧[k2] = [k]. Moreover, [k1] ⊥[k2] if and only if k† 1 ◦k2 = 0K2,K1.

3. Symmetric monoidal and compact quantaloids
As far as we know, quantaloids with a monoidal structure have never been investigated before. We propose the following definition of symmetric monoidal category that is also a quantaloid such that the quantaloid structure interacts with the monoidal structure:
3.1. Definition. A symmetric monoidal quantaloid is a symmetric monoidal category (Q, ⊗, I) for which Q is a quantaloid such that the map Q(X, W) × Q(Y, Z) →Q(X ⊗ Y, W ⊗Z), (f, g) 7→f ⊗g preserves suprema in both arguments separately. If, in addition,
• (Q, ⊗, I) is a dagger symmetric monoidal category and Q is a dagger quantaloid, then we call (Q, ⊗, I) a dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid;
• (Q, ⊗, I) is compact, then we call it a compact quantaloid;
• (Q, ⊗, I) is dagger compact, then we call it a dagger compact quantaloid.
Given two (dagger) symmetric monoidal quantaloids (Q, ⊙, J) and (R, ⊗, I), a homomorphism of (dagger) symmetric monoidal quantaloids F : (Q, ⊗, I) →(R, ⊙, J) is a homomorphism of (dagger) quantaloids F : Q →R that is also a (dagger) strong symmetric monoidal functor (cf. Definition 2.10). If, in addition, there is a (dagger) functor G : R →Q
such that F and G form an equivalence of (dagger) categories, we call Q and R equivalent (dagger) symmetric monoidal quantaloids.
If F is a homomorphism of (dagger) symmetric monoidal quantaloids, it is straightforward to see that G is also a homomorphism of (dagger) symmetric monoidal quantaloids. We thank the anonymous reviewer for the following observation: the category of quantaloids and homomorphisms of quantaloids has a cartesian monoidal structure, and becomes a 2-category with natural transformations between homomorphisms of quantaloids as 2-cells. We recall that a symmetric monoidal category is precisely a symmetric pseudomonoid in the 2-category of categories equipped with the cartesian monoidal structure. In a similar way, a symmetric monoidal quantaloid is precisely a symmetric pseudomonoid in the 2-category of quantaloids, and the preservation of suprema in both arguments separately emerges because of the cartesian monoidal structure of this 2-category.
3.2. Lemma. Let (Q, ⊗, I) be a symmetric monoidal quantaloid. Then for any objects W, X, Y, Z of Q and any morphism f : X →Y , we have f⊗⊥W,Z=⊥X⊗W,Y ⊗Z and ⊥W,Z ⊗f =⊥W⊗X,Z⊗Y .
Proof. Straightforward if one uses that the monoidal product preserves suprema of parallel morphisms in both of its arguments and by using that ⊥W,Z= W ∅W,Z with ∅W,Z the empty subset of Q(W, Z).
3.3. Scalars and types of symmetric monoidal quantaloids. Given a symmetric monoidal quantaloid (Q, ⊗, I), it follows that its scalars (Q(I, I), ◦, idI) form a quantale. Moreover, by [16, Lemma 2.3], this quantale is commutative. Inspired by Definition 2.39, we say that (Q, ⊗, I) is
• trivial if (Q(I, I), ◦, idI) is a trivial quantale;
• nontrivial if (Q(I, I), ◦, idI) is a nontrivial quantale;
• affine if (Q(I, I), ◦, idI) is an affine quantale;
• binary if (Q(I, I), ◦, idI) is isomorphic to the quantale (2, ·, 1) of Example 2.41.
Recall that an affine quantale is also called integral. There is already a notion of integral quantaloids, but this differs from our definition of affine symmetric monoidal quantaloids, because identity morphisms of integral quantaloids are assumed to be the largest endomorphisms of any object. For affine quantaloids, this condition is only assumed for the monoidal unit. For our purposes, the condition of integral quantaloids is too strong. For instance, we will see in Example 3.6 that FdOS is affine, even binary, but it is not integral: the identity morphism idX of a finite-dimensional Hilbert space of dimension H higher than 1 in FdOS is C1X, which is a one-dimensional operator space, whereas ⊤X = B(X), which has a dimension higher than 1, hence idX ̸= ⊤X. The next result justifies the terminology ‘trivial symmetric monoidal quantaloid.’
3.4. Lemma. Let (Q, ⊗, I) be a trivial symmetric monoidal quantaloid. Then Q is equivalent to the trivial category, i.e., the category with one object and one morphism.
Proof. Let X and Y be objects in Q, and f : X →Y a morphism. Then it follows from Lemma 3.2 that f⊗⊥I=⊥X⊗I,Y ⊗I. Using the naturality of the right unitor ρ, and Lemma 2.52, we have f = ρY ◦(f ⊗idI) ◦ρ−1 X = ρY ◦(f⊗⊥I) ◦ρ−1 X = ρY ◦⊥X⊗I,Y ⊗I ◦ρ−1 X =⊥X,Y . We conclude that Q(X, Y ) = 1 for any two objects, hence all objects of Q are mutually isomorphic, which implies that Q is equivalent to the trivial category.
3.5. Example. Let (V, ·, e) be a commutative quantale. If we define ⊗: V × V →V by 1 ⊗1 = 1 and v ⊗w = v · w for each v, w ∈V , then (V, ⊗, 1) is a strict symmetric monoidal category. Clearly, the symmetry of V follows from the commutativity of V . Since ⊗clearly preserves suprema in both arguments, (V, ⊗, 1) is a dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid. It is straightforward to see that (V, ⊗, 1) is in fact a dagger compact quantaloid if we define the unit η1 : 1 →1 ⊗1 and the counit ϵ1 : 1 ⊗1 →1 to be the identity on 1, i.e., the element e ∈V . Clearly, V is nontrivial if and only if V is nontrivial, affine if and only if V is affine, and binary if and only if V = 2.
So the monoid structure of V both induces the composition and the monoidal product of morphisms in V. The Eckmann-Hilton argument prevents us from considering a two different monoid structures on V , one inducing the composition, and the other the monoidal product of morphisms in V. So the above example seems to be the most general way a quantale V can be turned into a monoidal category that is a one-object quantaloid.
3.6. Example. The quantaloids FdOS and FdOS0 from Example 2.49 are dagger compact quantaloids. The monoidal product of X ⊗Y of objects in both quantaloids is the usual tensor product of Hilbert spaces. The monoidal unit is C. Given morphisms V : X1 →Y1 and W : X2 →Y2, we define V ⊗W : X1 ⊗X2 →Y1 ⊗Y2 as span{v ⊗w : v ∈V, w ∈W}. The associator (X⊗Y )⊗Z →X⊗(Y ⊗Z) in both FdOS and FdOS0 is given by CαX,Y,Z, where αX,Y,Z : (X ⊗Y )⊗Z →X ⊗(Y ⊗Z) is the associator in the category FdHilb of finitedimensional Hilbert spaces and linear operators. The unitors and the symmetry of FdOS and FdOS0 are defined similarly, as are the unit and the counit of the compact structure of FdOS and FdOS0. Here, the dual X∗of an object X in both quantaloids is the usual Banach space dual of X. Given finite-dimensional Hilbert spaces X1, X2, Y1, Y2 and operator spaces V : X1 →Y1 and W : X2 →Y2, it follows from (v ⊗w)† = v† ⊗w† for each v ∈V and w ∈W that (V ⊗ W)† = V † ⊗W †. Let (Vκ)κ∈K be a set-indexed family of operator spaces X1 →Y1. Clearly, for each λ ∈K, we have Vλ⊗W ⊆
κ∈K Vκ ⊗W. Then there are v1, . . . , vn ∈W
κ∈K Vκ and w1, . . . , wn ∈W such that x = v1 ⊗w1 + . . . + vn ⊗wn. For each i ∈{1, . . . , n}, there are κ(i,1), . . . , κ(i,mi) ∈K and v1 i ∈Vκ(i,1), . . . , vmi ∈Vκ(i,mi) such that vi = v1 i + . . . + vmi i . For i ∈{1, . . . , n} and j ∈{1, . . . , mi}, it follows that x(i,j) := vj i ⊗w1 + . . . + vj i ⊗wn ∈Vκ(i,j) ⊗W. Since x = Pn i=1 Pmi j=1 x(i,j) by linearity of the Hilbert space tensor product in each argument, it follows that x ∈W
κ∈K(Vκ ⊗W). We conclude that
κ∈K(Vκ ⊗W), and similarly, one shows that ⊗preserves suprema in the second argument. So FdOS and FdOS0 are indeed dagger compact quantaloids. Finally, FdOS(C, C) is the space of all subspaces of B(C). Since the latter is onedimensional, there can only be two subspaces, namely B(C) itself and the zero space 0.
Hence, FdOS is a binary dagger compact quantaloid. Since FdOS0(C, C) = FdOS(C, C), also FdOS0 is binary.
3.7. Theorem. Let (Q, ⊗, I) be a symmetric monoidal category with small biproducts such that Q is a quantaloid. Then (Q, ⊗, I) is a symmetric monoidal quantaloid if and only if (Q, ⊗, I) is an infinitely distributive symmetric monoidal category.
Proof. Assume that (Q, ⊗, I) is infinitely distributive. Then it follows directly from combining Propositions 2.36 and 2.62 that it is a symmetric monoidal quantaloid. Conversely, assume that (Q, ⊗, I) is a symmetric monoidal quantaloid. Let X ∈Q be an object and let (Yα)α∈A a family of objects in Q. In order to show that (Q, ⊗, I) is infinitely distributive, we need to show that the canonical morphism
ψ := [idX ⊗iYα]α∈A :
is an isomorphism. Our candidate inverse is φ := ⟨idX ⊗pYα⟩α∈A. Using the identities in Proposition 2.61, we have
α∈A (idX ⊗iYα) ◦pX⊗Yα, φ =
α∈A iX⊗Yα ◦(id ⊗pYα).
Then, using the identities for canonical projections and canonical injections of biproducts, and using that idX ⊗(−) preserves suprema, which follows since (Q, ⊗, I) is a symmetric monoidal quantaloid, direct calculations yield ψ ◦φ = idX⊗L α∈A Yα and φ◦ψ = idL α∈A X⊗Yα, so ψ is an isomorphism.
3.8. Example. [11, Section 2.1] The quantaloid (Sup, ⊗, 2) of Example 2.47 is a symmetric monoidal closed quantaloid with small biproducts. This can be seen as follows. Given a collection (Xα)α∈A of complete lattices, their set-theoretic product L
α∈A Xα is a complete lattice when ordered coordinate-wise. The canonical projections pβ : L
α∈A Xα →Xβ preserve all suprema, hence L
α∈A Xα is the product of (Xα)α∈A. Since Sup is a quantaloid, it follows from Proposition 2.61 it has all small biproducts. Explicitly, the canonical injection iβ : Xβ →L
α∈A is given by x 7→(xα)α∈A, where
Since (Sup, ⊗, 2) is symmetric monoidal closed and has small biproducts, it follows from Proposition 2.34 that Sup is an infinitely distributive symmetric monoidal category. Hence by Theorem 3.7, it is a symmetric monoidal closed quantaloid. Finally, it is straightforward to see that Sup(2, 2) ∼= 2, hence Sup is binary.
3.9. Corollary. Let (Q, ⊗, I) be a compact-closed category with small biproducts such that Q is a quantaloid. Then (Q, ⊗, I) is a compact quantaloid.
Proof. This follows directly from combining Corollary 2.35 and Theorem 3.7.
3.10. Proposition. Let (Q, ⊗, I) be a dagger compact category with small dagger biproducts such that Q is a quantaloid. Then (Q, ⊗, I) is a dagger compact quantaloid.
Proof. Let X and Y be objects in Q and let r, s : X →Y be morphisms. By Proposition 2.62 and Lemma 2.31 we have r ≤s if and only if r∨s = s if and only if r+s = s if and only if r† + s† = s† if and only if r† ∨s† = s† if and only if r† ≤s†. So the involution is an order embedding, which is also a bijection, hence it must be an order isomorphism. Thus, Q is a dagger quantaloid. It remains to be proven that (Q, ⊗, I) is a dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid, but this follows from Corollary 3.9.
3.11. Lemma. Let (Q, ⊗, I) be a compact quantaloid. Then for any two objects X and Y in Q, the following bijections are order isomorphisms:
Q(X, Y ) =−→Q(I, X∗⊗Y ), r 7→⌜r⌝,
Q(X, Y ) =−→Q(X ⊗Y ∗, I), r 7→⌞r⌟,
Q(X, Y ) =−→Q(Y ∗, X∗), r 7→r∗.
Proof. Since Q is a compact quantaloid, the operations r 7→r ⊗s and r 7→s ⊗r are monotone for any morphism s. Moreover, pre- and postcomposition with a fixed morphism are also monotone operations by definition of a quantaloid. Hence, by definition of ⌜r⌝, ⌞r⌟and r∗, all bijections in the statement are monotone maps. In the same way, it follows that the inverses of the first two bijections (cf. Lemma 2.8) are also monotone. Hence, the first two bijections are order isomorphisms. We show that the last bijection is an order isomorphism by showing that it is an order embedding, since a bijection order embedding is an order isomorphism. Let f, g ∈Q(X, Y ). We already showed that the last bijection is monotone, f ∗≤g∗. Conversely, assume that f ∗≤g∗. Since from the last (monotone) bijection we can deduce that also Q(Y ∗, X∗) →Q(X∗∗, Y ∗∗), h 7→h∗is a monotone bijection, it follows that f ∗∗≤g∗∗. Notate the natural isomorphism idQ →(−)∗∗by δ. Then it follows from naturality that f = δ−1 ◦f ∗∗◦δX and g = δ−1 ◦g∗∗◦δX. Hence, using that pre- and postcomposition in a quantaloid is monotone, we obtain f = δ−1 Y ◦f ∗∗◦δX ≤δ−1 Y ◦g∗∗◦δX = g. Thus also the last bijection is an order isomorphism.
3.12. Lemma. Let (R, ⊗, I) be a dagger compact quantaloid. Then for any object X of R, the map Tr : R(X, X) →R(I, I), r 7→Tr(r) preserves arbitrary suprema.
Proof. Since (R, ⊗, I) is a dagger compact quantaloid, it is a symmetric monoidal quantaloid, hence the map R(X, X) →R(X ⊗X∗, X ⊗X∗), r 7→r ⊗idX∗preserves suprema. Since Tr(r) = ϵX ◦(r⊗idX∗)◦ϵ† X, and both pre- and postcomposition in quantaloids preserve suprema, the statement follows.
3.13. Biproduct-induced quantaloid structure. Next, we give a proof that any infinitely distributive symmetric monoidal category with small biproducts and precisely two scalars is a symmetric monoidal quantaloid. This proof is essentially the proof of [28, Proposition 4.3]. Our assumptions are slightly weaker, which causes the proof to be slightly different. We first need a lemma, which is adapted from [28, Lemma 4.1].
3.14. Lemma. Let R be a category with small biproducts. If X is an object of R for which every nonzero endomorphism is invertible, then (R(X, X), +, 0X) is an idempotent commutative monoid.
Proof. Let R = R(X, X). It easily follows from Proposition 2.22 that (R, +, 0X) is a commutative monoid. By assumption each nonzero morphism f : X →X has an inverse f −1. Let ω = P∞ i=1 idX. Clearly, we have ω + ω = ω. Assume first that ω = 0X. Then 0X = ω = ω+idX = 0X+idX = idX, hence for each f ∈R, we have f = f◦idX = f◦0X = 0X, i.e., R = {0X}, which is trivially an idempotent commutative monoid. Next, assume that ω ̸= 0X. Then ω is invertible, whence idX + idX = ω−1 ◦ω + ω−1 ◦ω = ω−1 ◦(ω + ω) = ω−1 ◦ω = idX. It now follows for each f ∈R that f + f = f ◦(idX + idX) = f ◦idX = f, hence (R, +, 0X) is a commutative idempotent monoid.
3.15. Theorem. Let (R, ⊗, I) be an infinitely distributive symmetric monoidal category with all small biproducts and with precisely two scalars idI and 0I. Then R is a symmetric monoidal quantaloid where the supremum W
α∈A rα of a set-indexed family (rα)α∈A of morphisms in a homset R(X, Y ) is given by P
Proof. Let X and Y be objects in R, and let r ∈R(X, Y ). We have idI · r = λY ◦(idI ⊗ r) ◦λ−1 X = r ◦λX ◦λ−1 X = r by naturality of λ. Hence, for any nonempty set A, we have
where we used Lemma 2.37 in the last equality. In particular, for A = {1, 2}, we obtain r + r = (idI + idI) · r. Now, since idI is the only nonzero scalar, which is clearly invertible, it follows from Lemma 3.14 that (R(I, I), +, 0I) is an idempotent commutative monoid, so idI+ idI = idI. Thus r + r = idI · r = r, hence (R(X, Y ), +, 0X,Y ) is an idempotent commutative monoid. It is well known that such a monoid is a join-semilattice with r ∨s = r + s for each r, s : X →Y . Hence, r ≤s if and only if r ∨s = s if and only if r + s = s. Let (rα)α∈A be a set-indexed family of morphisms in R(X, Y ). It immediately follows that P
α∈A rα is an upper bound for the family. As a consequence, we also obtain idI ≤P
α∈A idI, and since idI is clearly the largest element in R(I, I) = {0I, idI}, we must have P
α∈A idI = idI. Assume s is another upper bound of (rα)α∈A. By (7), we obtain P
α∈A idI ·s = idI · s = s. Hence, for each α ∈A, we have rα ≤s, so rα + s = s, whence, s = P
α∈A rα ≤s, showing that
α∈A rα. It now follows from Proposition 2.22 that R is enriched over Sup, so it is a quantaloid. By Proposition 2.36 also the monoidal product ⊗on R is enriched over Sup, so R is a symmetric monoidal quantaloid.
3.16. Theorem. Let (R, ⊗, I) be an infinitely distributive dagger symmetric monoidal category with small dagger biproducts and precisely two scalars. Then R is a dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid, where the supremum W
α∈A fα of any set-indexed family (fα)α∈A in any homset R(X, Y ) is given by P
Proof. By Lemma 2.6, it follows that idI ̸= 0I, so the only non-zero scalar in R is invertible. By Theorem 3.15 it follows that R is a quantaloid and the supremum of morphisms in a homset is provided by taking their sums. In order to show that R is a dagger quantaloid, we have to show that for each X, Y ∈R, the map R(X, Y ) →R(Y, X), r 7→r† is an order isomorphism. So let r, s : X →Y . Using Proposition 2.32 and Lemma 2.31, we find r† ∨s† = r† + s† = ∇◦(r† ⊕s†) ◦∆= ∆† ◦(r ⊕s)† ◦∇† = (∇◦(r ⊕s) ◦∆)† = (r + s)† = (r ∨s)†. Hence, r ≤s if and only if s = r ∨s if and only if s† = (r ∨s)† if and only if s† = r† ∨s† if and only if r† ≤s†. Hence, R(X, Y ) →R(Y, X), r 7→r† is an order embedding. Since it is also a bijection, it is an order isomorphism. Finally, we need to show that (R, ⊗, I) is a symmetric monoidal quantaloid, but this follows directly from Proposition 2.36.
3.17. Biproduct completion of monoidal and compact quantaloids. Let (Q, ⊗, I, α, λ, ρ, σ) be a symmetric monoidal quantaloid. We define ⊗: Matr(Q) × Matr(Q) →Matr(Q) by X ⊗Y = (Xα ⊗Yβ)(α,β)∈A×B for objects X = (Xα)α∈A and Y = (Yβ)β∈B in Matr(Q). If W = (Wγ)γ∈C and Z = (Zδ)δ∈D are two other objects in Matr(Q) and f = (f γ α)(α,γ)∈A×C : X →W and g = (gδ β)(β,δ)∈B×D : Y →Z morphisms in Matr(Q), then we define (f ⊗g)(γ,δ) (α,β) := f γ α ⊗gδ
for each α ∈A, β ∈B, γ ∈C and δ ∈D. We define J ∈Matr(Q) to be the object (Jα)α∈1 with J∗= I. For objects X = (Xβ)β∈B, Y = (Yγ)γ∈C, and Z = (Zδ)δ∈D, we define
αX,Y,Z : (X ⊗Y ) ⊗Z →X ⊗(Y ⊗Z) λX : J ⊗X →X ρX : X ⊗J →X σX,Y : X ⊗Y →Y ⊗X
(αX,Y,Z)(β′,(γ′,δ′)) ((β,γ),δ)
λXβ, β = β′, ⊥I⊗Xβ,Xβ′, otherwise,
ρXβ, β = β′, ⊥Xβ⊗I,Xβ′, otherwise,
(σX,Y )(γ′,β′) (β,γ) =
3.18. Proposition. Let (Q, ⊗, I) be a (dagger) symmetric monoidal quantaloid. Then
(Matr(Q), ⊗, J) as defined above is a (dagger) symmetric monoidal quantaloid that is nontrivial if and only if Q is nontrivial, affine if and only if Q is affine, and binary if and only if Q is binary. Moreover, if (Q, ⊗, I) is a dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid with small dagger biproducts, then the functors EQ : Q →Matr(Q) and PQ : Matr(Q) →Q in Theorem 2.68 form an equivalence of dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloids.
Note that for two morphisms f : U →V and g : V →W in Q, we have g ◦f =⊥U,W if either f =⊥U,V or g =⊥V,W by Lemma 2.52. By assumption, Q is a symmetric monoidal quantaloid, hence given morphisms h : U →W and k : V ⊗Z in Q, it follows from Lemma 3.2 that h ⊗k =⊥U⊗V,W⊗Z if either h =⊥U,W or k =⊥V,Z. Hence,
(∗,γ) ◦(αX,J,Y )(β,(∗,γ)) ((β,∗),γ)
= (ρX ⊗idY )(β′,γ′) (β,γ) ,
where we used the triangle identity for Q in the penultimate equality. Hence, the triangle identity holds for Matr(Q). The pentagon identity for Matr(Q) follows in a similar way from the pentagon identity for Q. Let (Xα)α∈A, (Yβ)β∈B, W = (Wγ)γ∈C and Z = (Zδ)δ∈D be objects in Matr(Q). It remains to show that Matr(Q)(X, W) × Matr(Q)(Y, Z) →Matr(Q)(X ⊗Y, W ⊗Z), (f, g) 7→f ⊗g preserves suprema in each argument separately. So let (fκ)κ∈K be a family of morphisms in Matr(Q)(X, W). Then for each α ∈A, β ∈B, γ ∈C and δ, we have
κ∈K (fκ ⊗g)(γ,δ) (α,β) =
where the first and penultimate equalities are by definition of ⊗on Matr(Q), the second and last equalities by definition of suprema in Matr(Q), and the third equality because Q is a symmetric monoidal quantaloid. Thus
κ∈K(fκ⊗g), and in a similar way, we show that ⊗preserves suprema in the second argument. It is already asserted in Theorem 2.68 that Matr(Q) is a dagger quantaloid when Q is a dagger quantaloid. Assume that (Q, ⊗, I) is a dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid, and let f = (fγ α)(α,γ)∈A×C : (Xα)α∈A → (Wγ)γ∈C and g = (gδ β)(β,δ)∈B×D : (Yβ)β∈B →(Zδ)δ∈D are morphisms in Matr(Q). Then for each α ∈A, β ∈B, γ ∈C and δ ∈D, we have ((f ⊗g)†)(γ,δ) (α,β) = ((f ⊗g)(γ,δ) (α,β))† = (f γ α ⊗gδ β)† =
(f γ α)† ⊗(gδ β)† = (f †)γ α ⊗(g†)δ β = (f † ⊗g†)(γ,δ) (α,β), where we used the Q is a dagger symmetric monoidal category in the fourth equality. So (f ⊗g)† = f † ⊗g†. Hence, if Q is a dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid, then so is Matr(Q). Since the functor EQ : Q →Matr(Q) is fully faithful (cf. Theorem 2.68), we have Matr(Q)(J, J) = Q(I, I), hence Matr(Q) is nontrivial if and only if Q is nontrivial, affine if and only if Q is affine, and binary if and only if Q is binary. Assume that Q has all dagger biproducts. By Theorem 2.68, the functors EQ and PQ are homomorphisms of dagger quantaloids, and form an equivalence of categories, hence it suffices to show that only one of EQ and PQ is dagger strong monoidal. For X, Y ∈Q, note that J = (I) = EQ(I), and EQ(X) ⊗EQ(Y ) = (X) ⊗(Y ) = (X ⊗Y ), hence the coherence isomorphisms for EQ can be chosen to be identities, hence EQ is a strict symmetric monoidal functor, and since identities are in particular are unitaries, EQ is dagger strong symmetric monoidal. We conclude that EQ and PQ form an equivalence of dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloids.
3.19. Proposition. Let F : (Q, ⊙, IQ) →(R, ⊗, IR) be a homomorphism of dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloids with coherence dagger isomorphisms φ : IR →FIQ and φX,Y : FX ⊗FY →F(X ⊙Y ) for X, Y ∈Q. Let JQ and JR be the monoidal units of Matr(Q) and Matr(R), respectively. Then also Matr(F) : Matr(Q) →Matr(R) (cf. Theorem 2.68) is a homomorphism of dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloids with coherence dagger isomorphisms Ψ : JR →Matr(F)(JQ) to be the ‘matrix’ (φ). For objects X = (Xα)α∈A and Y = (Yβ)β∈B in Matr(Q), we define ΦX,Y : Matr(F)(X) ⊗Matr(F)(Y ) →Matr(F)(X ⊙Y ) for each α, γ ∈A and β, δ ∈B by
(ΦX,Y )(γ,δ) (α,β) =
φXα,Yβ, (α, β) = (γ, δ), ⊥FXα⊗FYβ,F(Xγ⊙Yδ), otherwise.
Moreover, Matr(F) is (fully) faithful if F is (fully) faithful, and preserves small dagger biproducts.
Proof. It follows from Theorem 2.68 that in order to show that Matr(F) is a homomorphism of dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloids, we only need to show that it is a dagger strong symmetric monoidal functor, which is straightforward but tedious, so as an illustration of the proof, we only verify condition (4) from the definition of a dagger strong symmetric monoidal functor (cf. Definition 2.10). Since F is dagger strong symmetric monoidal, we have FλY ◦φJ,Y ◦(φ ⊗idFY ) = λFY for each X, Y ∈Q. Now, let Y = (Yβ)β∈B be an object
of Matr(Q). Then for (∗, β) ∈1 × B and δ ∈B, we need to show that
Matr(F)(λY ) ◦ΦJQ,Y ◦(Φ ⊗idMatr(F)(Y )) (∗,β) = (λMatr(F)(Y ))δ (∗,β).
By definition, the right-hand side evaluates to λFYβ if δ = β, and to ⊥IR⊗FYβ,FYδ otherwise. Because F ⊥=⊥, and both the monoidal product and composition preserve ⊥in each argument separately by definition of a symmetric monoidal quantaloid, we have also have that the left-hand side eavluates to ⊥IR⊗FYβ,FYδ if β ̸= δ. In case β = δ, the left-hand side evaluates to
α,γ∈B F((λY )β (∗,α)) ◦(ΦJQ,Y )(∗,α) (∗,γ) ◦(Φ∗ ∗⊗(idMatr(F)(Y ))γ
= F((λY )β (∗,β)) ◦(ΦJQ,Y )(∗,β) (∗,β) ◦(Φ∗ ∗⊗(idMatr(F)(Y ))β
= F(λYβ) ◦φIQ,Yβ ◦(φ ⊗idFYβ) = λFYβ = (λMatr(F)(Y ))β (∗,β)
The other conditions in Definition 2.10 are verified in a similar way, and it is also straightforward that the coherence morphisms of Matr(F) are unitaries, and that Matr(F) is (fully) faithful when F is (fully) faithful. Finally, it follows from Proposition 2.64 that Matr(F) preserves small dagger biproducts.
3.20. Theorem. Let (Q, ⊗, I) be a (dagger) compact quantaloid with unit morphisms ηY : I →Y ∗⊗Y and counit morphisms ϵY : Y ⊗Y ∗→I for each object Y of Q. Then (Matr(Q), ⊗, J) becomes a (dagger) compact quantaloid if for each object X = (Xα)α∈A in Matr(Q) we define X∗:= (X∗ α)α∈A, and ηX : J →X∗⊗X and ϵX : X ⊗X∗→J by
ηXα, α = β, ⊥I,X∗α⊗Xβ, otherwise, , (ϵX)∗ (α,β) :=
ϵXα, α = β ⊥Xα⊗X∗ β,I, otherwise
Proof. Similar as in the proof of Proposition 3.18, we find for each α, β ∈A:
(λX◦(ϵX ⊗idX) ◦α−1 X,X∗,X ◦(idX ⊗ηX) ◦ρ−1 X )β
λXα ◦(ϵXα ⊗idXα) ◦α−1 Xα,X∗α,Xα ◦(idXα ⊗ηXα) ◦ρ−1 Xα, α = β, ⊥Xα,Xβ, α ̸= β
idXα, α = β, ⊥Xα,Xβ, α ̸= β,
where we used that Q is compact in the second equality. Thus, λX◦(ϵX⊗idX)◦α−1 X,X∗,X◦(idX⊗ ηX)◦ρ−1 X = idX, and in a similar way, we find ρX∗◦(idX∗⊗ϵX)◦αX∗,X,X∗◦(ηX ⊗idX∗)◦λ−1 X∗= idX∗, so Matr(Q, ⊗, J) is a compact quantaloid. If Q is a dagger compact quantaloid, we have for each α, β ∈A:
(γ,δ)∈A×A (σX,X∗)(α,β) (γ,δ) ◦((ϵX)∗ (γ,δ))†
= (σX,X∗)(α,β) (β,α) ◦((ϵX)∗ (β,α))† =
σXα,X∗α ◦ϵ† Xα, α = β, ⊥I,X∗α⊗Xβ, α ̸= β
ηXα, α = β, ⊥I,X∗α⊗Xβ, α ̸= β
from which we conclude that ηX = σX,X∗◦ϵ† X, which shows that (Matr(Q), ⊗, J) is dagger compact.
3.21. Example. Let V be a commutative quantale. Then × becomes a bifunctor on V -Rel if for V -relations r : X1 −7→Y1 and s : X2 −7→Y2 we define r × s : X1 × X2 −7→Y1 × Y2 as the function (X1 × X2) × (Y1 × Y2) →V given by
(r × s) (x1, x2), (y1, y2) := r(x1, y1) · s(x2, y2).
Then (V -Rel, ×, 1) is a dagger compact quantaloid, which can be seen as follows. By Example 3.5, V is a dagger compact quantaloid, hence by Theorem 3.20, so is Matr(V). It is straightforward to see that the equivalence of dagger quantaloids Matr(V) ∼= V -Rel in Proposition 2.67 is an equivalence of dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloids, hence also V -Rel is a dagger compact quantaloid.
3.22. Example. Since (FdOS, ⊗, C) is a binary dagger compact quantaloid (cf. Example 3.6), it follows that qRel = Matr(FdOS) is also a binary dagger compact quantaloid. The monoidal product of qRel is typically denoted by ×. The monoidal unit of qRel is 1 = (C). Since the embedding EFdOS : FdOS →Matr(FdOS) = qRel is fully faithful (cf. Theorem 2.68), it follows that qRel is also binary.
It might be odd to denote the monoidal product of qRel by ×, since in this article, given a symmetric monoidal quantaloid Q, we denote the monoidal product on Matr(Q) by the same symbol as the monoidal product of Q, and the monoidal product on FdOS is the Hilbert space tensor product ⊗. Moreover, the monoidal product × on qRel is not the categorical product. However, the monoidal product × on qRel is the noncommutative generalization of the set-theoretic product on Rel, which is also not a categorical product. In noncommutative mathematics, it is customary to use the same symbols for noncommutative generalizations of structures, which we choose to follow, even though it clashes with other conventions.

4. Dagger kernel quantaloids and orthomodularity
Dagger kernel categories require the existence of zero objects, which are not always present in a dagger quantaloids. However, we will see that one can freely add a zero object to any quantaloid. Since also the least elements of quantaloids with a zero object coincide with the zero maps (cf. Lemma 2.53), we can exploit this freely-added zero object to generalize the notion of dagger kernel categories to quantaloids without a zero object.
4.1. Freely adding a zero object to a quantaloid. Let Q be a quantaloid. By Q0, we denote the category that has the same objects as Q, together with one addition object, denoted 0. For objects X, Y ∈Q0, we define
Q(X, Y ), X ̸= 0 ̸= Y, otherwise.
In case X = 0 or Y = 0, we denote the single morphism in Q(X, Y ) by ⊥X,Y . We define composition g ◦0 f on Q0 of morphisms f : X →Y and g : Y →Z in Q0 by
g ◦f, X, Y, Z ∈Q, ⊥X,Z, otherwise.
In practice, we will just write g ◦f instead of g ◦0 f. It is straightforward that if Q0 is a quantaloid with a zero object 0. If Q is a dagger quantaloid, then clearly Q0 also is a dagger quantaloid. If Q already had a zero object, then the (−)0-construction adds an additional zero object. If (Q, ⊗, I) is a (dagger) symmetric monoidal quantaloid, then we can define a symmetric monoidal product ⊗0 on Q0 such that also (Q0, ⊗0, I) is a (dagger) symmetric monoidal quantaloid. Namely, for objects X, Y ∈Q0 we define
X ⊗Y, X, Y ∈Q, otherwise.
For morphisms f : X →W, g : Y →Z in Q0 we define
f ⊗g, f ∈Q(X, W), g ∈Q(Y, Z), ⊥X⊗0Y,W⊗0Z, otherwise.
Since X ⊗0 = 0 and 0 ⊗Y = 0 for each X, Y ∈Q, it follows that the components of the associator, unitors, and symmetry involving 0 must be ⊥. In a similar way, it easily follows that (Q0, ⊗0, I) is a (dagger) compact quantaloid if (Q, ⊗, I) is a (dagger) compact quantaloid by taking 0∗= 0. In practice, we just write ⊗instead of ⊗0. Let Q be a dagger quantaloid. Then the inclusion ZQ : Q →Q0, which is clearly a homomorphism of dagger quantaloids, has the universal property that for each dagger quantaloid with zero object R and each homomorphism of dagger quantaloids F : Q →R,
there is a homomorphism of dagger quantaloids ˆF : Q0 →R that is unique up to natural isomorphism such that the following diagram commutes up to natural isomorphism:
Indeed, for each object X ∈Q0, we define
FX, X ∈Q; otherwise,
and for each morphism f : X →Y in Q0 we define
Ff, X, Y ∈Q, ⊥ˆFX, ˆFY , otherwise.
4.2. Example. The dagger compact quantaloid FdOS0 (cf. Example 3.6) can be obtained from the dagger compact quantaloid FdOS by freely adjoining a zero object.
Our running examples V -Rel and qRel are obtained by applying the dagger biproduct completion to a dagger quantaloid Q without a zero object. The following proposition states that adding a zero object to Q yields the same quantaloid.
4.3. Proposition. Let Q be a dagger quantaloid. Then Matr(ZQ) : Matr(Q) and Matr(Q0) is an equivalence of dagger quantaloids.
Proof. By Theorem 2.68, the inclusion ZQ : Q →Q0 induces a homomorphism of dagger quantaloids Matr(ZQ) : Matr(Q) →Matr(Q0), which satisfies Matr(ZQ) ◦EQ = EQ0 ◦ZQ. Since Matr(Q) has a zero object, it follows from the universal property of ZQ : Q →Q0 that there is some homomorphism of dagger quantaloids G : Q0 →Matr(Q) such that G ◦ZQ = EQ, namely G = c EQ. By the universal property of EQ0 : Q0 →Matr(Q0) as the dagger biproduct completion of Q0 (cf. Theorem 2.68), it follows that there is some homomorphism of dagger quantaloids H : Matr(Q0) →Matr(Q) such that H ◦EQ0 = G, namely H = G. Then H ◦Matr(ZQ) ◦EQ = H ◦EQ0 ◦ZQ = G ◦ZQ = EQ, and by the universal property of EQ, we find H ◦Matr(ZQ) ∼= idMatr(Q). Furthermore, we have Matr(ZQ) ◦G ◦ZQ = Matr(ZQ) ◦EQ = EQ0 ◦ZQ, and from the universal property of ZQ, we obtain Matr(ZQ) ◦G ∼= EQ0. Then Matr(ZQ) ◦H ◦EQ0 = Matr(ZQ) ◦G ∼= EQ0, and by the universal property of EQ0, we obtain Matr(ZQ) ◦H ∼= idMatr(Q0).
Now, in order to find the generalization of dagger quantaloids with dagger kernels, we need the quantaloid analog of a zero-mono.
4.4. Definition. We call a morphism m : Y →Z in a dagger quantaloid Q a ⊥-mono if m ◦f =⊥X,Z implies f =⊥X,Y for each object X of Q and each morphism f : X →Y .
4.5. Example. Let F be a frame. Then F is an affine commutative quantale with x · y = x∧y. Given x ∈F, we define the pseudocomplement x∗of x by x∗:= W{y ∈F : x∧y =⊥}. We say that x is dense in F if x∗=⊥. Then the dense elements of F are precisely the ⊥-monos of F(1, 1). Indeed, if x is dense, and y is an element of F such that x · y =⊥, then x ∧y =⊥, hence y ≤x∗=⊥, so y =⊥, which shows that x is a ⊥-mono. Conversely, if x is a ⊥-mono, then a · a∗= a ∧a∗=⊥, which implies that a∗=⊥, so a is dense. Since Boolean algebras are precisely the frames for which ⊤is the only dense element, it follows that F is Boolean if and only if ⊤is the only ⊥-mono in F.
The following two lemmas are straightforward.
4.6. Lemma. Let Q be a dagger quantaloid. Then a morphism m : X →Y in Q is a ⊥-mono if and only if it is a zero-mono in Q0. If Q has a zero object, then its ⊥-monos coincide with its zero-monos.
4.7. Lemma. Let Q be a dagger quantaloid. For each X, Y ∈Q, if Q(X, Y ) has a ⊥-mono m, then any n ∈Q(X, Y ) such that m ≤n is a ⊥-mono.
In particular, ⊥-monos that are effects will be of importance.
4.8. Lemma. Let (Q, ⊗, I) be a dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid such that for each object X ∈Q, there is precisely one ⊥-monic effect X →I. Then:
(a) ⊤X,I is the only ⊥-monic effect X →I for each object of Q;
(b) (Q, ⊗, I) is affine;
(c) ⊤Y,J is the only ⊥-monic effect for each object Y of Matr(Q);
(d) (Matr(Q), ⊗, J) is affine.
Proof. By Lemma 4.7, it follows that ⊤X,I is the only ⊥-monic effect of any object X ∈Q, which proves (a). Since idI is clearly a ⊥-mono, this forces idI = ⊤I, so Q is affine, proving (b). For (c), let Y = (Yα)α∈A be an object in Matr(Q). If A = ∅, then Y is the empty family, which is the zero object in Matr(Q), from which it immediately follows that ⊤Y,J =⊥Y,J, and that ⊤Y,J is a ⊥-mono. So we may assume that A ̸= ∅. Clearly, ⊤Y,J = (⊤Yβ,I)(β,∗)∈B×1. Let f = (f β α)(α,β)∈A×B : X →Y be a morphism such that ⊤Y,J ◦f =⊥X,J. Fix α ∈A. Then we have ⊥Xα,I= (⊤Y,J ◦f)∗ α =
β∈B (⊤Y,J)∗ β ◦f β α =
which forces ⊤Yβ,I ◦f β α =⊥Xα,I for each β ∈B. Hence, for fixed β ∈B, since ⊤Yβ,I is a ⊥-mono, we must have f β α =⊥Xα,Yβ. We conclude that f =⊥X,Y , so ⊤Y,J is a ⊥-mono. Let g : Y →J be another effect, not equal to ⊤Y,J. So there is some β0 ∈B such that β0 < ⊤Yβ0,I. Then g∗ β0 : Yβ0 →I cannot be a ⊥-mono in Q, hence there is some nonzero
h : Z →Yβ0 such that g∗ β0 ◦h =⊥Z,I. Let W = (Wδ)δ∈1 with W∗= Z, so W ∈Matr(Q), and let r : W →Y be given by
β = β0, ⊥Z,Yβ, β ̸= β0.
β̸=β0 β◦⊥Z,Yβ ∨g∗ β0 ◦h = 0Z,I,
so g ◦r =⊥W,J. We conclude that g is not a ⊥-mono, so ⊤Y,J is the only ⊥-monic effect on Y . Now (d) follows from (a).
4.9. Lemma. In (FdOS0, ⊗, C), an effect R : Y →C is a ⊥-mono if and only if R = ⊤Y,C.
Proof. We first show that ⊤Y,C is a ⊥-mono, so let S : X →Y be a nonzero morphism in FdOS0. Then there is some s ∈S such that s(x) ̸= 0 for some x ∈X. Write y = s(x). Let ˆy := ⟨y, −⟩: Y →C, which is an element of B(Y, C) = ⊤Y,C. Then ˆt(s(x)) = ⟨y, y⟩̸= 0, since y ̸= 0. Thus, ˆyr ̸= 0, hence ⊤Y,C · S ̸= 0, so ⊤Y,C is a ⊥-mono. For the converse, assume that R : Y →C is not equal to ⊤Y,C = B(Y, C). So R is a proper subspace of B(Y, C), It follows that there is a nonzero functional φ : Y →C that is orthogonal to all functionals in S. The Riesz representation theorem states that the map y 7→⟨y, −⟩is an antilinear bijective isometry Y →B(Y, C). Hence, for any functional ψ : Y →C, the Riesz representation theorem assures the existence of a unique yψ ∈Y such that ψ = ⟨yψ, −⟩. Write y = yφ. Note that y ̸= 0, for φ is nonzero. Let ψ ∈S. Since ψ ⊥φ, it follows from the Riesz representation theorem that 0 = ⟨φ, ψ⟩= ⟨yψ, y⟩= ψ(y). As a consequence, we have ψ(y) = ⟨yψ, yφ⟩= ⟨ψ, φ⟩= 0. Let ˇy : C →Y be function λ 7→λy. Note that Cˆy : C →Y is nonzero a morphism in FdOS0. Moreover, for each ψ ∈S and each λ ∈C, we have ψ(ˇy(λ)) = ψ(λy) = λψ(y) = 0, hence ψˆy = 0 for each ψ ∈S. It follows that S · Cˆy = 0, hence S cannot be a ⊥-mono in FdOS0.
In light of Lemma 2.72, a quantaloid without zero object cannot have kernels of ⊥-monos, leading to:
4.10. Definition. Let Q be a dagger quantaloid. If the dagger equalizer k of a morphism f : X →Y and ⊥X,Y exists, we call it the dagger kernel of f. We say that Q has dagger kernels or that Q is a dagger kernel quantaloid if the dagger kernel of any morphism that is not a ⊥-mono exists.
It follows immediately from Lemma 2.53 that the definition of a dagger kernel above coincides with the definition of a dagger kernel category if Q has a zero object. The next proposition shows that dagger kernel quantaloids generalize dagger quantaloids that are simultaneously dagger kernel categories, and justifies the terminology in the previous definition.
4.11. Proposition. Let Q be a dagger quantaloid.
(a) If Q has a zero object, then it is a dagger kernel quantaloid if and only if it is a dagger kernel category, i.e., if Q is a dagger kernel quantaloid, then the dagger kernel of any morphism in Q exists.
(b) If Q does not have a zero object, then it is a dagger kernel quantaloid if and only if Q0 is a dagger kernel category.
Proof. For (a), assume Q has a zero object. Then 0X,Y =⊥X,Y for each object X, Y ∈Q (cf. Lemma 2.53), and zero-monos and ⊥-monos coincide (cf. Lemma 4.6). As a consequence, if Q is a dagger kernel category, then clearly it is a dagger kernel quantaloid. Conversely, if Q is a dagger kernel quantaloid, showing that Q is a dagger kernel category only requires showing that the dagger kernel of any zero-mono f : X →Y in Q exists, but this follows from Lemma 2.72. For (b), assume that Q does not have a zero object. By (a), it suffices to show that Q is a dagger kernel quantaloid if and only if Q0 is a dagger kernel quantaloid. Assume that Q is a dagger kernel quantaloid, and let f : X →Y be a morphism in Q0 that is not a ⊥-mono in Q0. Assume first that X ̸= 0 ̸= Y , so f ∈Q(X, Y ). Since f is not a ⊥-mono in Q0, there is some Z ∈Q0 and g ∈Q0(Z, X) \ {⊥Z,X} such that f ◦g =⊥Z,Y . The condition g ̸=⊥Z,X forces Z ̸= 0, and hence g ∈Q(Z, X). As a consequence, f is also a ⊥-mono in Q, hence the dagger equalizer k : K →X of f and ⊥X,Y exists in Q. Let Z ∈Q0 and g : Z →X another morphism such that f ◦g =⊥X,Y ◦g, i.e., such that f ◦g =⊥Z,Y . Since k is the dagger equalizer of f and ⊥X,Y in Q, it follows that there is some h ∈Q(Z, K) = Q0(Z, K) such that k ◦g = h. If Z = 0, then g =⊥0,X, hence there is also some h ∈Q0(Z, K) with k ◦g = h, namely h =⊥Z,K. Now assume that X = 0 or Y = 0. Then we must have f =⊥X,Y , hence the equalizer of f and ⊥X,Y is idX ∈Q0(X, X), which is clearly a dagger mono. We conclude that Q0 is a dagger kernel quantaloid. Now assume Q0 is a dagger kernel quantaloid. Let f : X →Y be a morphism in Q that is not a ⊥-mono in Q. Hence, there is some Z ∈Q and some g ∈Q(Z, X) \ {⊥Z,X} such that f ◦g =⊥Z,Y . Clearly, this implies that f is also a ⊥-mono in Q0, so the dagger equalizer k : K →X of f and ⊥X,Y in Q0 exists. Now, we cannot have K = 0, because f ◦g =⊥Z,Y =⊥X,Y ◦g implies the existence of some h : Z →0 such that k ◦h = g, which forces g = 0Z,X =⊥Z,X. As a consequence, K ∈Q, so the dagger equalizer of f and ⊥X,Y in Q exists.
4.12. Lemma. The associated quantaloid V of a commutative quantale (V, ·, e) (cf. Example 2.46) is a dagger kernel quantaloid if and only if for each v, w ̸=⊥in V we have v · w ̸=⊥.
Proof. Recall that v† = v for each v ∈V. We first show that the dagger kernel of v =⊥in V always exists, and equals e. Since e† ◦e = e, it follows that e is a dagger mono. We have v · e =⊥·e =⊥. Furthermore, for each w ∈V , we have v · w =⊥·w =⊥, but w factorizes via e: w = e · w, so e = ker(⊥). Thus, V is a dagger kernel quantaloid if every v ̸=⊥ that is not a ⊥-mono has a dagger kernel. Now, the condition v · w ̸=⊥for each v, w ̸=⊥ in V implies that any v ̸=⊥is a ⊥-mono, so in this case V is a dagger kernel quantaloid. We prove the converse implication by contraposition. Assume that there are v, w ̸=⊥in V
such that v · w =⊥. Thus v is not a ⊥-mono. Assume that there is a dagger mono k ∈V such that v · k =⊥. The condition that k is a dagger mono translates to k · k = e. Then ⊥= v · k · k = v · e = v, contradicting that v ̸=⊥, hence v does not have a dagger kernel. So V is not a dagger kernel quantaloid.
4.13. Example. Frames F in which v ∧w ̸=⊥for each v, w ̸=⊥in F are pointfree generalizations of hyperconnected topological spaces. The only Boolean algebra that has this property is the two-element Boolean algebra 2.
4.14. Example. Let (M, ·, e) be a commutative monoid. For each A, B ⊆M define A·B = {a · b : a ∈A, b ∈B}. Then (P(M), ·, {e}) is a commutative quantale such that A · B ̸= ∅ for each A, B ̸= ∅in the power set P(M).
4.15. Lemma. FdOS and FdOS0 (cf. Example 2.49) are dagger kernel quantaloids.
Proof. By Proposition 4.11, it suffices to show that FdOS0 is a dagger kernel category. Let R : X →Y be a morphism in FdOS0, so a subspace of B(X, Y ). Let K = T
r∈R ker r. Then K is a subspace of X, so we can denote k : K →X the inclusion in FdHilb. Then E = Ck is a morphism in FdOS0(K, X), which we claim to be the dagger kernel of R. Firstly, E is a dagger mono, because for each x, y ∈K, we have ⟨k†kx, y⟩= ⟨kx, ky⟩= ⟨x, y⟩, so k†k = 1K. Hence, E† · E = Ck†k = C1K = idK. It follows from k†k = 1K that p := kk† : X →X is a projection in FdHilb, i.e., p2 = p = p†. If x ∈K, then px = pkx = kk†kx = kx = x. Let x ∈X such that px = x. Let r ∈R. Then for each z ∈K ⊆ker r, we have 0 = rz = rkz, hence rk = 0. As a consequence, we have rx = rpx = rkk†x = 0, so x ∈ker r. Since r ∈R is arbitrary, we obtain x ∈T
r∈R ker r = K. Thus, for each x ∈X, we have x ∈K if and only if px = x. We found that rk = 0 for each r ∈R. Hence, R · E = {rk : r ∈R} = 0. Now, let S : Z →X be another morphism in FdOS with R · S = 0. Let T ∈FdOS0(Z, K) be defined by T = {k†s : s ∈S}. Fix s ∈S and z ∈Z. Then, for each r ∈R, we have rs = 0, hence r(s(z)) = 0, so s(z) ∈ker r. Thus s(z) ∈T
r∈R ker r = K. Thus ps(z) = s(z) for each z ∈Z, whence ps = s. As a consequence, we have E · T = {kt : t ∈T} = {kk†s : s ∈S} = {ps : s ∈S} = {s ∈S} = S. We conclude that E : K →X is the dagger kernel of R in FdOS0.
4.16. Lemma. A morphism r : X →Y in a dagger kernel quantaloid Q is a ⊥-mono if and only if r† ◦r is a ⊥-mono.
Proof. Assume r is a ⊥-mono in Q, and let s : Z →X be a morphism in Q such that r† ◦r ◦s =⊥Z,X. By Lemma 4.6, r is a zero-mono in Q0, which is a dagger kernel category by Proposition 4.11. By Lemma 2.53, we have r† ◦r ◦s = 0Z,X in Q0, so (r ◦s)† ◦(r ◦s) = s† ◦r† ◦r ◦s = 0Z. By Lemma 2.74 we have r ◦s = 0Z,Y . Since r is a zero-mono, we obtain s = 0Z,X, so r† ◦r is a zero-mono in Q0. By Lemma 4.6, it follows that r† ◦r is a ⊥-mono in Q. Conversely, assume that r† ◦r is a ⊥-mono, and let s : Z →X be a morphism such that r ◦s =⊥Z,Y . Then r† ◦r ◦s =⊥Z,X, and since r† ◦r is a ⊥-mono, it follows that s =⊥Z,X, so r is a ⊥-mono.
4.17. Orthomodularity. An ortholattice is a bounded lattice L equipped with an involutive order-reversing map x 7→¬x such that x ∧¬x = 0 and x ∨¬x = 1, where 0 and 1 denote the respective least and greatest element of L. If, in addition, for each x, y ∈L we have that x ≤y implies y = x ∨(¬x ∧y), we call L an orthomodular lattice. Orthomodular lattices generalize modular ortholattices, i.e., ortholattices L that satisfy the modular law: x ≤z implies x ∨(y ∧z) = (x ∨y) ∧z for each x, y, z ∈L. The homsets of Rel and qRel are complete orthomodular lattices. In fact, the homsets of the former category are even Boolean algebras, whereas the homsets of the latter are complete modular ortholattices. Affine dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloids with orthomodular homsets have the following property:
4.18. Lemma. Let (Q, ⊗, I) be an affine dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid such that every homset of Q is an orthomodular lattice. Then (Q(I, I), ◦, idI) is a complete Boolean algebra with r ∧s = r ◦s for each r, s ∈Q(I, I).
Proof. Let V = Q(I, I). We already saw in 3.3 that (V, ◦, idI) is a commutative quantale. By definition of affine symmetric monoidal quantaloids, we have idI = ⊤I. Let r, s ∈V . Then r◦s ≤r◦⊤I = r◦idI = r and similarly, r◦s ≤s, so r◦s ≤r∧s. Hence, ¬r◦r ≤¬r∧r =⊥I, forcing ¬r◦r =⊥I. Then r = idI◦r = ⊤I◦r = (r∨¬r)◦r = (r◦r)∨(¬r◦r) = (r◦r)∨⊥I= r◦r, so each r ∈V is idempotent. By Lemma 2.44, it follows that V is a frame with r ∧s = r ◦s for each r, s ∈V , hence it satisfies the distributivity property r ∧(s ∨t) = (r ∧s) ∨(r ∧t) for each r, s, t ∈V . Now, since V is an ortholattice satisfying this distributivity property, it is a Boolean algebra. Completeness follows by definition of a quantale.
If Q is a dagger compact quantaloid such that every object of Q has precisely one ⊥monic effect, then the existence of dagger kernels is sufficient to show that homset of Q are orthomodular. We will see later that qRel is an example of a dagger kernel quantaloid (cf. Proposition 4.25). We further note that in an orthomodular lattice, there is an orthogonality relation ⊥defined by x ⊥y if and only if x ≤¬y. We first start with the case of effects, for which we do not need compactness.
4.19. Definition. Let (Q, ⊗, I) be a dagger symmetric monoidal category. Then for each object X of Q, we define a binary relation ⊥on the set of effects Q(X, I) by r ⊥s if and only if r ◦s† =⊥I.
4.20. Lemma. Let (Q, ⊗, I) be a dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid with dagger kernels and a zero object. Let r : X →I be an effect with dagger kernel k : K →X (existence assured by Proposition 4.11). Define ¬r : X →I by
¬r := {s ∈Q(X, I) : r ⊥s}.
(a) For any two effects r, s : X →I, we have s ≤¬r if and only if r ⊥s;
(b) For any effect s : X →I we have r ⊥s if and only if s = t ◦k† for some effect t : K →I.
Proof. By Lemma 2.53, 0X,Y =⊥X,Y for any two objects X and Y of Q. If r ⊥s then s ≤¬r by definition of ¬r. Assume that s ≤¬r Then, since Q is a quantaloid, we have
s ◦r† ≤¬r ◦r† = {t ∈Q(X, I) : r ⊥t} ◦r† = {t ◦r† : t ∈Q(X, I) : r ⊥t}
{t ◦r† : t ∈Q(X, I) : t ◦r† =⊥I} =⊥I,
which forces s ◦r† =⊥I. Thus r ⊥s. For (b), if s = t◦k†, then r◦s† = r◦k◦t† =⊥K,I ◦t† =⊥I,I=⊥I. Conversely, if r◦s† =⊥I, then by the universal property of dagger kernels, there is a morphism v : I →K such that k ◦v = s†. Choosing t = v† now yields s = t ◦k†. Finally, for (c), it follows from (b) that ¬r = W{s ∈Q(X, I) : r ⊥s} = W{t ◦k† : t ∈ Q(K, I)} = (W Q(K, I)) ◦k† = ⊤K,I ◦k†.
4.21. Lemma. Let (Q, ⊗, I) be a dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid with dagger kernels and a zero object such that every object of Q has precisely one ⊥-monic effect. Then any r : Y →I equals ⊤K⊥,I ◦k† ⊥, where k : K →Y is the dagger kernel of r (existence assured by Proposition 4.11).
Proof. By Lemma 2.73, in which we take X = I and f = r†, we have r† = ker(k†) ◦e for some zero-epi e : I →K⊥. Since k⊥= ker(k†), we obtain r = e† ◦k† ⊥. Since e is a zero-epi, it follows that e† is a zero-mono, hence by Lemma 4.6, e† is a ⊥-mono. By Lemma 4.7, also ⊤K⊥,I is a ⊥-mono. By assumption, there is precisely one ⊥-monic K⊥→I, whence e† must equal ⊤K⊥,I.
4.22. Proposition. Let (Q, ⊗, I) be a dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid such that Q is a dagger kernel category and such that every object of Q has precisely one ⊥-monic effect. Let X be an object of Q. Then KSub(X) and Q(X, I) are ortho-isomorphic complete orthomodular lattices, where the orthocomplementation of the latter is the map r 7→¬r of Lemma 4.20. The ortho-isomorphism Q(X, I) →KSub(X) is given by r 7→[ker(r)⊥].
Proof. By Proposition 2.75 it follows that KSub(X) is an orthomodular lattice. Since Q is a dagger kernel category, it has a zero object, hence ⊥X,Y = 0X,Y for each X, Y ∈Q by Lemma 2.53, and zero-monos are ⊥-monos by Lemma 4.6. We claim that the map φ : Q(X, I) →KSub(X), r 7→[ker(r)⊥] is an order isomorphism such that φ(¬r) = ¬φ(r) for each r ∈Q(X, I). Since KSub(X) is an orthomodular lattice, it then follows that r 7→¬r defines an orthocomplementation on Q(X, I) such that Q(X, I) is an orthomodular lattice. Completeness of Q(X, I) follows since Q is a quantaloid. Note that once the ortho-isomorphism between Q(X, I) and KSub(X) is established, completeness of the former implies completeness of the latter. In order to show that φ is an ortho-isomorphism, we first check that φ is monotone. So let r, s : X →I, and let Kr and Ks be the domains of ker(r) and ker(s), respectively.
Assume that r ≤s, then r◦ker(s) ≤s◦ker(s) = 0Ks,I =⊥Ks,I, which forces r◦ker(s) =⊥Ks,I. It follows from the universal property of dagger kernels that there must be some a : Ks → Kr such that ker(s) = ker(r) ◦a, hence [ker(s)] ≤[ker(r)] in KSub(X), implying φ(r) = [ker(r)⊥] ≤[ker(s)⊥] = φ(s). Next, we show that φ is an order embedding. So assume that φ(r) ≤φ(s), i.e., [ker(r)⊥] ≤[ker(s)⊥]. In other words, ker(r)⊥= ker(s)⊥◦a for some morphism a : K⊥ r →K⊥ s , which is necessarily a dagger mono, see 2.70. Using Lemma 4.21, we obtain r = ⊤K† r,I ◦ker(r)† ⊥= ⊤K† r,I ◦a† ◦ker(s)† ⊥≤⊤K⊥ s ,I ◦ker(s)† ⊥= s, so φ is indeed an order embedding. In order to show that it is an order isomorphism, we only have to show it is surjective. So let k : K →I in KSub(X), and let r = TK,I ◦k†. Now, ⊤K,I is a ⊥-mono by Lemma 4.7, so a zero-mono. Moreover, we have ker(m ◦f) = ker(f) for each morphism f and each zero-mono m by [6, Lemma 4.2]. Hence, ker(r) = ker(TK,I ◦k†) = ker(k†) = k⊥, which implies φ(r) = [ker(r)⊥] = [k⊥⊥] = [k]. Finally, for arbitrary r : X →I, we have ¬r = ⊤K,I ◦(ker r)† by Lemma 4.20. Again using that ⊤K,I is a zero-mono, we obtain φ(¬r) = [ker(¬r)⊥] = ¬[ker(¬r)] = ¬[ker(⊤K,I ◦ (ker r)†)] = ¬[ker(ker r)†] = ¬[(ker r)⊥] = ¬φ(r). Finally, it follows from (a) of Lemma 4.20 that ⊥is the associated orthogonality relation of the orthocomplementation ¬ on Q(X, I).
We note that we never assumed our categories to be well powered, so a priori, there is no guarantee that KSub(X) in Q is a set. However, since Q is a quantaloid, it is locally small, and the theorem above establishes a bijection between Q(X, I) and KSub(X), which assures that the latter is indeed a set.
4.23. Corollary. Let (Q, ⊗, I) be a dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid with dagger kernels and a zero object such that every object of Q has precisely one ⊥-monic effect. Then the set Q(I, X) of states on any object X is a complete orthomodular lattice.
4.24. Corollary. Let (Q, ⊗, I) be a dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid with dagger kernels such that every object in Q has precisely one ⊥-monic effect. Then Matr(Q) is a dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid with dagger kernels such that for each object X of Matr(Q), there is precisely one ⊥-monic effect, namely ⊤X,J.
Proof. By Proposition 4.3, we may assume that Q has a zero object, hence by Proposition 4.11 it follows that Q is a dagger kernel category. The latter proposition also assures that it suffices to show that Matr(Q) is a dagger kernel category. By Lemma 4.8, each object X of Matr(Q) has precisely one ⊥-monic effect, namely ⊤X,J, hence it follows from Proposition 4.22 that KSub(X) is a complete orthomodular lattice for each object X of Q. Let X = (Xα)α∈A, Y = (Yβ)β∈B be objects of Matr(Q), and let f = (f β α)(α,β)∈A×B : X →Y be a morphism. We show that the dagger kernel of f exists. For each α ∈A and each β ∈B, the dagger kernel kα,β : Kα,β →Xα of f β α : Xα →Yβ in Q exists. Fix α ∈A. Since KSub(Xα) is a complete orthomodular lattice, it follows that kα := infβ∈B kα,β in KSub(Xα) exists. Let Kα be the domain of kα, so kα : Kα →Xα. Then for each β ∈B, we have the inequality [kα] ≤[kα,β] in KSub(Xα), so there exists a gβ : Kα →Kα,β such that kα = kα,β ◦gβ. As a consequence, for each β ∈B, we have
f β α ◦kα = f β α ◦kα,β ◦gβ = 0Kα,β,Yβ ◦gβ = 0Kα,Yβ. (8)
Let K = (Kα)α∈A, and let k : K →X in Matr(Q) be given by
kα, α = α′, 0Kα,Xα′, α ̸= α′
α′∈A f β α′ ◦kα′ α = 0Kα,Yβ for each α ∈A and each β ∈B. So f ◦k = 0K,Y . Let Z = (Zγ)γ∈C be an object of Matr(Q), and let h = (hα γ)(γ,α)∈C×A : (Zγ)γ∈C → (Xα)α∈A be morphism such that f ◦h = 0Z,Y . Fix α ∈A, and γ ∈C. Using Lemma 2.73, we find some mα γ : N α γ →Xα in KSub(Xα) and some zero-epi eα γ : Zγ →N α γ such that γ ◦eα γ = hα γ. Then for each β ∈B, we have
Now, fix also β ∈B. Then
⊥Zγ,Yβ= 0Zγ,Yβ = (f ◦h)β γ =
α′∈A f β α′ ◦hα′ γ ,
which forces f β α ◦hα γ =⊥Zγ,Yβ= 0Zγ,Yβ. Now, since eα γ is a zero-epi and 0Zγ,Yβ = f β α ◦hα γ = f β α ◦mα γ ◦eα γ, we obtain f γ α ◦mα γ = 0Nα γ ,Yβ. Since kα,β = ker(f β α), there must be some nα γ : N α γ →Kα,β such that mα γ = kα,β ◦nα This precisely expresses that [mα γ] ≤[kα,β] in KSub(Xα). By definition of kα, we obtain [mα γ] ≤[kα], hence there must be some sα γ : N α γ →Kα such that mα γ = kα ◦sα Let γ : Zγ →Kα be given by rα γ = sα γ ◦eα γ. Then r = (rα γ )(γ,α)∈C×A : Z →K is a morphism in Matr(Q) such that for each γ ∈C and α ∈A we have
α′∈A α′ ◦rα′ γ = kα ◦rα γ = kα ◦sα γ ◦eα γ = mα γ ◦eα γ = hα
so h = k ◦r. We conclude that k is the dagger kernel of f in Matr(Q).
4.25. Proposition. The category qRel is a binary dagger compact quantaloid with dagger kernels such that each quantum set X has precisely one ⊥-monic effect, namely ⊤X,1.
Proof. By definition, we have qRel = Matr(FdOS), which is a binary dagger compact quantaloid by Example 3.22. It follows from Proposition 4.3 that qRel ∼= Matr(FdOS0). Since FdOS0 is a dagger kernel quantaloid (cf. Lemma 4.15) such that for each object X in FdOS0 there is only one ⊥-monic effect X →C (cf. Lemma 4.9), the statement follows from Corollary 4.24.
Since Tr(s) = s for any scalar s in a dagger compact category (cf. Proposition 2.13), it follows that the definition of ⊥and ¬ in the next theorem generalizes the definition of ⊥ and ¬ on sets of effects in Proposition 4.22.
4.26. Theorem. Let Q be a dagger compact quantaloid with dagger kernels such that every object has precisely one ⊥-monic effect. Then Q is affine, and for any two objects X and Y in Q, the homset Q(X, Y ) is a complete orthomodular lattice with orthocomplementation r 7→¬r given by ¬r = W{s ∈Q(X, Y ) : r ⊥s}, where the orthogonality relation ⊥on Q(X, Y ) is given by r ⊥s if and only if Tr(r ◦s†) =⊥I. Moreover, the map Q(X, Y ) → Q(X ⊗Y ∗, I), r 7→⌞r⌟is an ortho-isomorphism.
Proof. We first assume that Q has a zero object. By Proposition 4.11, Q is a dagger kernel category, hence it follows from Proposition 4.22 that Q(X ⊗Y ∗, I) is a complete orthomodular lattice. We consider the order isomorphism Q(X, Y ) →Q(X ⊗Y ∗, I), r 7→ ⌞r⌟= ϵY ◦(r ⊗idY ∗) from Lemma 3.11. Then for r, s : X →Y , we find Tr(r ◦s†) = ϵY ◦((r ◦ s†)⊗idY ∗)◦ϵ† Y = ϵY ◦(r⊗idY ∗)◦(s†◦idY ∗)◦ϵ† Y = ϵY ◦(r⊗idY ∗)◦(ϵY ◦(s⊗idY ∗))† = ⌞r⌟◦⌞s⌟†. It follows that r ⊥s if and only if Tr(r ◦s†) =⊥I if and only if ⌞r⌟◦⌞s⌟† =⊥I. Hence, using that ⌞−⌟is an order isomorphism, we obtain
⌞¬r⌟= ⌞ {s ∈Q(X, Y ) : r ⊥s}⌟= {⌞s⌟: s ∈Q(X, Y ), r ⊥s}
{⌞s⌟: s ∈Q(X, Y ), ⌞r⌟◦⌞s⌟† =⊥I} = {t ∈Q(X ⊗Y ∗, I) : ⌞r⌟◦t† =⊥I}
{t ∈Q(X ⊗Y ∗), ⌞r⌟⊥t} = ¬ ⌞r⌟.
So, ⌞−⌟preserves the orthocomplementation, hence it is an ortho-isomorphism. It follows that Q(X, Y ) inherits the structure of a complete orthomodular lattice from Q(X ⊗Y ∗, I). It remains to be shown that ⊥is the associated orthogonality relation of the orthocomplementation ¬ on Q(X, Y ), but this follows directly from the result that r 7→⌞r⌟is an ortho-isomorphism with respect to ¬, and our previous calculation that r ⊥s if and only if ⌞r⌟◦⌞s⌟† =⊥I, which is equivalent to ⌞r⌟⊥⌞s⌟. Now assume that Q does not have a zero object. Then (Q0, ⊗, I) is also a dagger compact quantaloid, and by Proposition 4.11, it is a dagger kernel quantaloid and every object has precisely one ⊥-monic effect. Hence, the statement applies to Q0. As a consequence, for any two object X and Y of Q, we have Q(X, Y ) = Q0(X, Y ) is orthomodular, and the map Q(X, Y ) →Q(X ⊗Y ∗, I), r 7→⌞r⌟is an ortho-isomorphism. Since we showed that the homsets of Q are orthomodular, it follows from Lemma 4.18 that Q is affine.
4.27. Corollary. Let (R, ⊗, I) be a dagger compact category with dagger kernels, all small dagger biproducts, with precisely two scalars, and such that every object has precisely one zero-monic effect. Then R is a binary dagger compact quantaloid such that every homset
R(X, Y ) is a complete orthomodular lattice with orthogonality relation r ⊥s if and only if Tr(r ◦s†) = 0I and orthocomplementation ¬r = W{s ∈R(X, Y ) : r ⊥s}.
Proof. Combine Theorems 3.16 and 4.26.

5. Internal maps
From this section on, we will focus on internalizing structures in dagger quantaloids. We will regard morphisms in dagger quantaloids as generalizations of relations, and will also refer to them as ‘relations’. Then we can generalize properties of ordinary endorelations as follows:
5.1. Definition. Let X be an object of a dagger quantaloid Q and let r : X →X be an endorelation on X. Then we call r:
• reflexive if idX ≤r;
• transitive if r ◦r ≤r;
• idempotent if r ◦r = r;
• symmetric if r† = r;
• anti-symmetric if r ∧r† ≤idX;
• a preorder if r is reflexive and transitive;
• an order if r is an antisymmetric preorder;
• a partial equivalence relation (PER) if r is symmetric and transitive;
• an equivalence relation if r is a reflexive PER, or equivalently, if r is a symmetric preorder;
• a projection if it is a symmetric idempotent.
If, in addition, Q can be equipped with a dagger-compact monoidal structure, we say that r is:
• irreflexive if Tr(r) =⊥I.
5.2. Definition and properties of internal maps. We proceed with introducing internal maps in dagger quantaloids, whose definition is similar to the definition of an internal map in an allegory.
5.3. Definition. Let Q be a dagger quantaloid. We call a morphism f : X →Y in Q a map if f † ◦f ≥idX and f ◦f † ≤idY .
5.4. Lemma. Let X, Y, Z be objects of a dagger quantaloid Q. Then:
(1) for any two maps f : X →Y and g : Y →Z in Q, also g ◦f : X →Z is a map;
Proof. Let f : X →Y and g : Y →Z be maps, so f † ◦f ≥idX and f ◦f † ≤idY , and g†◦g ≥idY and g◦g† ≤idZ. Then (g◦f)†◦(g◦f) = f †◦g†◦g◦f ≥f †◦idY ◦f = f †◦f ≥idX, and (g ◦f) ◦(g ◦f)† = g ◦f ◦f † ◦g† ≤g ◦idY ◦g† = g ◦g† ≤idZ, so g ◦f is indeed a map. Finally, we have id† X = idX, hence id† X ◦idX = idX = idX ◦id† X, showing that idX is a map.
The previous lemma assures that the following category is well defined.
5.5. Definition. Let Q be a dagger quantaloid. Then by Maps(Q) we denote the wide subcategory of Q of maps.
Note that Maps(Rel) = Set. This lead to:
5.6. Definition. We define qSet := Maps(qRel), the category of quantum sets and functions.
It was shown in [26] that qSet is dually equivalent to the category of hereditarily atomic von Neumann algebras and normal unital ∗-homomorphisms. We recall that a hereditarily atomic von Neumann algebra is an operator algebra isomorphic to an ℓ∞-sum of matrix algebras. Because of this dual equivalence, Set embeds dually into the category of hereditarily atomic von Neumann algebras and normal unital ∗-homomorphisms, which is the reason why working with quantum sets might feel more natural than working with hereditarily atomic von Neumann algebras.
5.7. Definition. A map f : X →Y in a dagger quantaloid Q is called
• injective if f † ◦f = idX;
• surjective if f ◦f † = idY ;
• bijective if it is both injective and surjective.
We note that given the dagger biproduct X of a set-indexed family (Xα)α∈A of objects in a dagger quantaloid with small biproducts, the canonical injection iα : Xα →X is indeed an injection in the above sense, since i† α ◦iα = pα ◦iα = idXα, whereas iα ◦i† α ≤W
β∈A iβ ◦pβ = idX (cf. Proposition 2.61).
5.8. Lemma. Let f : X →Y be a morphism in a dagger quantaloid Q. Then the following are equivalent:
(a) f is a bijective map;
(b) f is a dagger isomorphism in Q;
(c) f is an isomorphism in Maps(Q).
Proof. The equivalence between (a) and (b) is trivial. Let f be a bijective map, so f † ◦f = idX and f ◦f † = idY . It follows immediately that f † is also a map that is the inverse of f, hence f is an isomorphism in Maps(Q). Conversely, assume that f is an isomorphism in Maps(Q), so there is a map g : Y →X such that g ◦f = idX and f ◦g = idY . Using that g is a map, it follows that g† = g† ◦g ◦f ≥f and g† = f ◦g ◦g† ≤f. Thus g† = f, hence f † = g. It follows that f † ◦f = idX and f ◦f † = idY , so f is a bijective map.
5.9. Lemma. Let Q be a dagger quantaloid, and let f, g : X →Y be parallel maps in Q. If f ≤g in Q, then f = g.
Proof. Since f ≤g, we have f † ≤g†. We have g = g◦idX ≤g◦f †◦f ≤g◦g†◦f ≤idY ◦f = f, which yields equality between f and g.
5.10. Lemma. Any homomorphism of dagger quantaloids F : Q →R restricts and corestricts to a functor Maps(F) : Maps(Q) →Maps(R), which is (fully) faithful if F is (fully) faithful.
Proof. Let X and Y be objects of Q. By definition of a homomorphism of dagger quantaloids, the map FX,Y : Q(X, Y ) →R(FX, FY ), f 7→Ff preserves the dagger and suprema, hence it is in any case a monotone map, from which it is straightforward that FX,Y restricts and corestricts to a map Maps(F)X,Y : Maps(Q)(X, Y ) →Maps(R)(FX, FY ). It is also evident that Maps(F) is functorial, for F is a functor. Clearly, Maps(F) is faithful if F is faithful. Assume, in addition, that F is full. By Lemma 2.50, it follows that FX,Y is an order isomorphism. Let g ∈Maps(R)(FX, FY ), so g† ◦g ≥idFX and g ◦g† ≤idFY . Then g ∈R(FX, FY ), so there is some f ∈Q(X, Y ) such that g = Ff. Since FX,Y preserves daggers, we have F(f † ◦f) = g† ◦g ≥idFX = FidX, and F(f ◦f †) = g ◦g† ≤idFY = FidY , and since FX,Y is an order isomorphism, it follows that f † ◦f ≥idX and f ◦f † ≤idY , i.e., f ∈Maps(Q)(X, Y ). Hence, also Maps(F) is full.
5.11. Lemma. Let (Q, ⊗, I) be a dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid. Then Maps(Q) is a symmetric monoidal subcategory of Q.
Proof. In order to show that Maps(Q) is a symmetric monoidal subcategory of Q, we only have to verify that the associator, unitors and symmetry are maps, but this follows immediately because in the definition of a dagger symmetric monoidal category, these morphisms are required to be dagger isomorphisms.
5.12. Proposition. Let F : (Q, ⊙, J) →(R, ⊗, I) be a homomorphism of dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloids. Then Maps(F) : (Maps(Q), ⊙, J) →(Maps(R), ⊗, I) is a strong symmetric monoidal functor with the same coherence morphisms as F.
Proof. Let ψ : J →FI and ψX,Y : FX ⊗FY →F(X ⊙Y ) be the coherence morphisms for X, Y ∈Q, which are dagger isomorphisms, since any homomorphism of dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloids in particular is a dagger strong symmetric monoidal functor. Since Q and Maps(Q) share the same objects, the statement follows if we can prove that the coherence maps are bijective functions. But this follows from Lemma 5.8.
5.13. Proposition. Let (R, ⊗, I) be a dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid with all small dagger biproducts. Then the embedding Maps(R) →R creates all coproducts, i.e., if (Xα)α∈A is a collection of objects in Maps(R), then their dagger biproduct in R is their coproduct in Maps(R), and the canonical injections in R are maps.
Proof. Let X be the dagger biproduct in R of a collection (Xα)α∈A of objects in Maps(R) with canonical injections iα : Xα →X for each α ∈A. Fix α ∈A. Since X is a dagger biproduct, the canonical projection pα : X →Xα satisfies pα = i† By definition of a biproduct, we have i† α ◦iα = pα ◦iα = idXα. It follows from Corollary 2.23 that iα ◦i† α = iα ◦pα ≤W
β∈A iβ ◦pβ = idX, so iα is indeed a map. Now, let Y be another object of Maps(R), and for each α ∈A, let fα : Xα →Y be a map. To show that X is the coproduct of (Xα)α∈A in Maps(R), we have to show that f := [fα]α∈A : X →Y is a map. Using Proposition 2.32, we find
α∈A fα ◦f † α ≤idY ,
for fα◦f † α ≤idY because fα is a map. By the same proposition, we obtain (f †◦f)α,β = f † β◦fα. Let α, β ∈A. First assume that α ̸= β. By Lemma 2.28, we have (idX)α,β = 0Xα,Xβ for α ̸= β, so (f † ◦f)α,β ≥(idX)α,β. Now, let α = β. Since fα is a map, it follows that (f † ◦f)α,β = f † α ◦fα ≥idXα = (idX)α,β, where the last identity also follows from Lemma 2.28. So (f † ◦f)α,β ≥(idX)α,β for each α, β ∈A. It now follows from Proposition 2.63 that f † ◦f ≥idX, so f is a map.
5.14. The families construction. Given a dagger quantaloid Q, Proposition 5.13 begs the question whether Maps(Matr(Q)) is the free coproduct completion of Maps(Q). We will see that for 2, this is indeed the case, not in general, the statement is false. For an arbitrary category C, the free coproduct completion is the category Fam(C) of set-indexed families (Xα)α∈A. A morphism (φ, f) : (Xα)α∈A →(Yβ)β∈B in Fam(C) consists of a function φ : A →B and for each α ∈A, a morphism fα : Xα →Yφ(α). Now in 2, there is only one map, which corresponds to the element 1 in 2 = {0, 1}. Hence, as a category, we have Maps(2) ∼= 1, whence Maps(Matr(2)) ∼= Maps(Rel) = Set = Fam(1) ∼= Fam(Maps(2)). For an arbitrary dagger quantaloid Q, we have an inclusion I : Fam(Maps(Q)) → Maps(Matr(Q)). Indeed, the objects in both categories are clearly the same, so I is the identity on objects. Given a morphism (φ, f) : (Xα)α∈A →(Yβ)β∈B in Fam(Matr(Q)), we define I(f, φ) : (Xα)α∈A →(Yβ)β∈B in Maps(Matr(Q)) by
fα, β = φ(α), ⊥Xα,Yβ, otherwise.
Using that each fα is a map, so a morphism of Maps(Q), it is straightforward to see that I(φ, f) is a map, so a morphism of Maps(Matr(Q)). However, in general, I is not full, so not an equivalence. For instance, let Q = FdOS. Let H be a two-dimensional Hilbert space, and let p, q : H →H be two orthogonal projections that span the identity 1H of H in FdHilb.
Let P, Q ∈FdOS(H, H)
For instance, if H = C2, let p =
be the morphisms P = Cp and Q = Cq. Then, in FdOS, we have p, q ∈P ∨Q, hence idH = C1H = C(p + q)H ⊆P ∨Q. Let H, X in qRel = Matr(FdOS) be given by H = (H),
and X = (Xα)α∈2, where X0 = X1 = C. Let F : H →X be given by F 0 ∗= ⊤H,C · P and F 1 ∗= ⊤H,C · Q. Then both F 0 ∗and F 1 ∗are not maps in FdOS, but F is a map in qRel. To see that F is a map in Matr(FdOS), it is easiest to apply Theorem 7.10 below, which we are allowed to use by Theorem 5.22 below. We have P · Q† = P · Q = 0 because pq = 0, hence Tr(F 0 ∗· (F 1 ∗)†) = Tr(⊤H,C · P · Q† · ⊤† H,C) = Tr(0) = 0 =⊥C, so F 0 ∗⊥F 1 ∗. Furthermore, we have F 0 ∗∨F 1 ∗= ⊤H,C ·(P ∨Q) ≥⊤H,C ·idH = ⊤H,C. We have ⊤H,C = B(H, C) = H∗, the Banach space dual of H, which is also a Hilbert space. Hence, F 0 ∗= ⊤H,C ·P = H∗p = p∗H∗, where p∗: H∗→H∗, φ 7→φ(−)p is the Banach space dual of p. Also p∗is a projection, but on the Hilbert space H∗. Since the map r 7→rK is a bijection between projections r on a finite-dimensional Hilbert space K and subspaces rK of K, it follows that F 0 ∗is a proper subspace of ⊤H,C. In a similar way, we find that F 1 ∗< ⊤H,C in FdOS. Since ⊤H,C is the only map H →C in FdOS by Proposition 5.16 below, it follows that F 0 ∗and F 1 ∗are not maps in FdOS. Hence, F is not of the form I(φ, f) for some morphism (φ, f) : H →X in Fam(FdOS).
5.15. ⊥-monic partial equivalence relations. We recall that a morphism p in a dagger quantaloid R is called a partial equivalence relation (PER) if it is symmetric, i.e., p† = p, and transitive, i.e., p◦p ≤p. An important property of a dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid R will be whether ⊥-monic PERs are equivalence relations, as this is one of the conditions that assures that the internal maps of R form a semicartesian category, i.e., a symmetric monoidal category with terminal monoidal unit. We will see that both in Rel and qRel ⊥-monic PERs are equivalence relations.
5.16. Proposition. Let (Q, ⊗, I) be an affine dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid with dagger kernels. Assume that for each object X of Q:
(1) there is a ⊥-monic effect e : X →I;
(2) any ⊥-monic PER on X is an equivalence relation on X.
(a) I is terminal in Maps(Q), where for each object X ∈Maps(Q) the unique map X →I is ⊤X,I;
(b) for each object X of Q, the morphism ⊤X,I : X →I is the unique effect that is ⊥-monic.
Proof. Let e : X →I be a ⊥-monic effect. Then e ◦e† is a scalar, and since Q is affine, it follows that e ◦e† ≤idI. Consider p = e† ◦e. Then p† = p and p ◦p = e† ◦e ◦e† ◦e ≤ e† ◦idI ◦e = p, so p is a PER. It follows from from Lemma 4.16 that p is also a ⊥-mono in Q. Hence, by assumption, we have that p is an equivalence relation, so p ≥idX. It follows that e is a map. Let f : X →I be another map. Since Q is affine, we have e ◦f † ≤idI, hence e ≤e ◦f † ◦f ≤idI ◦f = f, hence it follows from Lemma 5.9 that e = f. By Lemma 4.7 it follows that ⊤X,I is a ⊥-monic effect, which is therefore a map, and any other map X →I must be equal to ⊤X,I, proving that I is terminal in Maps(Q). For (b), if e : X →I is another ⊥-monic effect, it follows that e is a map which necessarily equals ⊤X,I, so ⊤X,I : X →I is the unique effect on X that is ⊥-monic.
5.17. Lemma. The only nontrivial commutative quantale (V, ·, e) whose associated quantaloid V (cf. Example 2.46) is affine, has dagger kernels, and that has the property that every ⊥-monic PER is an equivalence relation is the two-element Boolean algebra 2.
Proof. We first note that because V is affine, it immediately follows that there is a ⊥-monic effect 1 →1 in V, namely the identity e. In order to see that V must be 2, we first note that the requirement that V is a dagger kernel quantaloid forces V to satisfy v · w ̸=⊥for any v, w ̸=⊥in V (cf. Lemma 4.12), so any v ̸=⊥in V is a ⊥-mono in V. Moreover, V is affine, hence for each v ∈V , we have v · v ≤v · ⊤= v · e = v. Since we always have v† = v, it follows that every v ∈V is a PER, hence for every v ̸=⊥, we must have ⊤= e ≤v, which forces v = ⊤for all v ̸=⊥.
Also ⊥-monic PERs in FdOS are equivalence relations. We first need a lemma. We recall that in the finite-dimensional setting, a C*-algebra is a subalgebra of the algebra of all linear operators B(H) on a finite-dimensional Hilbert space that is selfadjoint, i.e., closed under the dagger on FdHilb.
5.18. Lemma. Let H be a finite-dimensional Hilbert space and let A ⊆B(H) be a C*subalgebra that acts on H in a nondegenerate way, i.e., for each nonzero x ∈H, there is some a ∈A such that ax ̸= 0. Then 1H ∈A.
Proof. Since A is a C*-subalgebra of a finite-dimensional C*-algebra, it must be finitedimensional itself, hence it should contain a unit element e [40, Lemma 11.1]. We will show that e = 1H. Since A acts in a nondegenerate way on H, we have that the span of {ax : a ∈A, x ∈H} equals H [40, Proposition 9.2]. Hence, for each x ∈H, there are a1, . . . , an ∈A and x1, . . . , xn ∈H such that x = a1x1 + . . . + anxn. Then ex = e(a1x1 + . . . + anxn) = (ea1)x1 + . . . + (ean)xn = a1x1 + . . . + anxn = x. Thus e is indeed the identity 1H on H.
5.19. Proposition. Let H be a nonzero finite-dimensional Hilbert space, and let P : H → H be a PER in FdOS. If P is a ⊥-mono, then it is an equivalence relation in FdOS.
Proof. Since P is a PER, we have P · P ⊆P and P † = P. From the latter identity it follows that P is a self-adjoint subspace of B(H). Furthermore, for each a, b ∈P, we have ab ∈P · P ⊆P, so P is a self-adjoint subalgebra of B(H). Since B(H) is finite-dimensional, it follows that P is a C*-subalgebra of B(H). Let x ∈H be nonzero, and let ˇx : C →H be the map λ 7→λx. Define the morphism R ∈FdOS(C, H) by R = Cˇx. Then R ̸=⊥C,H, and since P is a ⊥-mono, we must have P · R ̸=⊥C,H, so there is some a ∈P such that aˇx ̸= 0. This means that λax = a(λx) = (aˇx)(λ) ̸= 0 for some λ ∈C, which is only possible if ax ̸= 0. Thus, P is a C*-subalgebra of B(H) that acts in a nondegenerate way on H, so Lemma 5.18 implies that 1H ∈P. As a consequence idH = C1X ⊆H, showing that P is reflexive, hence an equivalence relation on H in FdOS.
5.20. Proposition. Let R be a dagger quantaloid such that every ⊥-monic PER in R is an equivalence relation. Then every ⊥-monic PER in Matr(R) is an equivalence relation.
Proof. Let X = (Xα)α∈A be an object in Matr(R) and let p = (pβ α)(α,β)∈A×A : X →X be a ⊥-monic PER on X, p† = p and p ◦p ≤p. Fix α ∈A. Let r : Y →Xα be a morphism in R such that pα α ◦r =⊥Y,Xα. Let f : (Y ) →X be the morphism in Matr(R) given by
for each β ∈A. Then p ◦f =⊥(Y ),X, and since p is ⊥-monic, it follows that f =⊥(Y ),X, which forces r = f α ∗= (⊥(Y ),X)α ∗=⊥Y,Xα. So pα α is a ⊥-mono. Moreover, since p is a PER, it follows that (pα α)† = (p†)α α = pα α and pα α◦pα α ≤W
γ∈A pα γ ◦pγ α = (p ◦p)α α ≤pα α, so pα α is a ⊥-monic PER on the object Xα in R. It follows that pα α is an equivalence relation, hence idXα ≤pα α. As a consequence, (idX)α α = idXα ≤pα α. Since for each distinct α, β ∈A we have (idX)β α =⊥Xα,Xβ, it follows that idX ≤p, so p is an equivalence relation.
The following theorems on Rel and qRel summarize all their relevant properties in this article. We note that stronger properties for Rel that actually characterize it as a dagger category are presented in [28].
5.21. Theorem. Rel is a binary dagger compact quantaloid with dagger kernels, and small dagger biproducts. Moreover, for each set X, there is a unique ⊥-monic effect, namely ⊤X,1, and any ⊥-monic PER on X is an equivalence relation.
Proof. By Example 3.21, Rel is a dagger compact quantaloid that is equivalent to Matr(2) as a dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid. Clearly, Rel is binary. Combining Lemma 5.17 with Corollary 4.24 and Proposition 5.20, it follows that Rel is a dagger kernel quantaloid, ⊤X,1 is the unique ⊥-monic effect X →1 for each set X, and that every ⊥-monic PER in Rel is an equivalence relation.
5.22. Theorem. qRel is a binary dagger compact quantaloid with dagger kernels and small dagger biproducts such that for each quantum set X the effect ⊤X,1 is the only ⊥-monic effect, and such that any ⊥-monic PER on X is an equivalence relation.
Proof. By definition of qRel = Matr(FdOS), it follows that qRel has small dagger biproducts. By Proposition 4.25, qRel is a binary dagger compact quantaloid with dagger kernels, such that each quantum set X has a unique ⊥-monic effects, namely ⊤X,1. Since every ⊥-monic PER in FdOS is an equivalence relation (cf Proposition 5.19), it follows from Proposition 5.20 that every ⊥-monic PER in qRel is an equivalence relation.

6. Internal preorders
6.1. Preordered objects. In this section, we investigate internal preorders in dagger quantaloids (cf. Definition 5.1).
6.2. Lemma. Let r : X →X be an endorelation on an object X of a dagger quantaloid R. Then:
(a) r† is reflexive if r is reflexive;
(b) r† is transitive if r is transitive;
(c) r† is symmetric if r is symmetric;
(d) r† is anti-symmetric if r is anti-symmetric;
(e) r† is irreflexive if r is irreflexive (under the additional assumptions that R is a dagger compact quantaloid).
Proof. Statements (a)-(d) follow because (−)† is a functor whose action on homsets is an involutive order isomorphism. Statement (e) follows from [16, Lemma 3.63(f)].
6.3. Lemma. Let r : X →X be an endorelation on an object X of a dagger compact quantaloid R. Then r∗on X∗satisfies the following properties:
(a) r∗is reflexive if r is reflexive;
(b) r∗is transitive if r is transitive;
(c) r∗is symmetric if r is symmetric;
(d) r∗is anti-symmetric if r is anti-symmetric;
(e) r∗is irreflexive if r is irreflexive (under the additional assumptions that R).
Proof. Statements (a), (b), and (d) hold because (−)∗is a functor whose action on homsets is an order isomorphism (cf. Lemma 3.11). Statement (c) follows from Lemma 2.11 and the symmetry of r. Statement (e) follows fromTrX∗(r∗) = TrX(r) by [16, Exercise 3.12(c)].
6.4. Example. Let X be an object in a dagger quantaloid R. Then the identity morphism idX on X is reflexive, transitive, symmetric, and anti-symmetric. We call idX the trivial or flat order on X.
6.5. Definition. An preorder on an object X of a dagger quantaloid R is a reflexive and transitive endomorphism ≼: X →X. We call the pair (X, ≼) a preordered object. If, in addition, ≼is anti-symmetric, we call ≼a partial order and (X, ≼) a partially ordered object, or with a slight abuse of terminology a poset. Sometimes, we will say that X is a preordered object or poset without mentioning the (pre)order ≼explicitly.
We will often formulate inequalities between morphisms in a dagger quantaloid R involving preorders ≼on objects X of R. In order to increase the readability of those expressions, we will sometimes write (≼) instead of ≼. Given a preorder ≼on an object X in a dagger quantaloid R, it follows from Lemma 6.2 that the dagger ≼† of ≼is again a preorder. Similarly, if (R, ⊗, I) is a dagger compact quantaloid, it follows from Lemma 6.3 that the dual ≼∗of ≼is a preorder (on X∗). In both cases, the resulting preorders are even orders when ≼is an order. This leads to the following definition:
6.6. Definition. Let (X, ≼) be a preordered object in a dagger quantaloid R.
• We call the preorder ≽:= ≼† the opposite preorder, and the pair (X, ≽) the opposite preordered objects, also denoted by (X, ≼)op, or simply Xop if it is clear that X is preordered by ≼.
• If (R, ⊗, I) is a dagger compact quantaloid, we call the preorder ≼∗the dual preorder, and the pair (X∗, ≼∗) the preordered object dual to (X, ≼), also denoted by (X, ≼)∗, or simply X∗if it is clear that X is preordered by ≼.
If ≼is an order, we call Xop and X∗the opposite poset and the dual poset of X, respectively.
For R = Rel, the opposite preorder on an object coincides with the dual preorder. However, for R = qRel both concepts differ, since objects are not naturally isomorphic to their dual in this category, let alone equal as in the case of Rel. We further note that by Lemma 2.11, we have (Xop)∗= (X∗)op for each preordered object For the next definition, recall that a map from an object X to an object Y in a dagger quantaloid R is a morphism f : X →Y such that f † ◦f ≥idX and f ◦f † ≤idY .
6.7. Definition. Let (X, ≼X) and (Y, ≼Y ) be preordered objects of a dagger quantaloid R. Then a map f : X →Y is called:
• monotone if it satisfies satisfies one of the following equivalent conditions (hence all):
(1) f ◦(≼X) ≤(≼Y ) ◦f;
(2) f ◦≼X ◦f † ≤(≼Y );
(3) (≼X) ≤f † ◦≼Y ◦f.
• an order embedding if ≼X = f † ◦≼Y ◦f;
• an order isomorphism if it is a monotone map that has an inverse which is also monotone.
We verify that the conditions in the definition are indeed equivalent. Assume that (1) holds. We show that (2) holds:
f ◦≼X ◦f † ≤(≼Y ) ◦f ◦f † ≤(≼Y ) ◦idY = (≼Y ).
Now assume that (2) holds. We show that (3) holds:
(≼X) = idX ◦≼X ◦idX ≤f † ◦f ◦≼X ◦f † ◦f ≤f † ◦≼Y ◦f.
Finally we show that (3) implies (1), so assume that (≼X) ≤f † ◦≼Y ◦f. Then:
f ◦(≼X) = f ◦f † ◦≼Y ◦f ≤idY ◦≼Y ◦f = (≼Y) ◦f.
It follows directly from the definitions that an order embedding is monotone.
6.8. Lemma. Let f : X →Y be a map in a dagger quantaloid R, and let ≼be a preorder on Y . Then f : (X, idX) →(Y, ≼) is monotone.
Proof. By a direct calculation: f ◦idX = idY ◦f ≤≼◦f.
6.9. Lemma. Let (X, ≼X), (Y, ≼Y ) and (Z, ≼Z) be preordered objects in a dagger quantaloid R and let f : X →Y and g : Y →Z be monotone maps. Then g ◦f is a monotone map.
Proof. By monotonicity of f and g, we have f ◦(≼X) ≤(≼Y ) ◦f and g ◦(≼Y ) ≤(≼Z) ◦g, hence g ◦f ◦(≼X) ≤g ◦(≼Y ) ◦f ≤(≼Z) ◦g ◦f.
It follows from the previous lemma that the following categories are well defined.
6.10. Definition. Let R be a dagger quantaloid. Then:
• PreOrd(R) is defined as the category of preordered objects and monotone maps. The identity morphism on an object (X, ≼) of PreOrd(R) is the identity idX on X.
• Pos(R) is defined as the full subcategory of PreOrd(R) of partially ordered objects.
If R = Rel, we have PreOrd(R) = PreOrd and Pos(R) = Pos.
6.11. Lemma. Let X and Y be preordered objects in a dagger quantaloid R and let f : X → Y be a map. Then f : X →Y is monotone if and only if f : Xop →Y op is monotone.
Proof. Let ≼X and ≼Y be the preorders on X and Y , respectively. Assume that f : (X, ≼X) →(Y, ≼Y ) is a monotone map. Then f ◦(≼X) ≤(≼Y ) ◦f, hence (≽X) ◦f † = (≼X)† ◦f † ≤f † ◦(≼Y )op = f † ◦(≽Y ). Using the properties of a map, we obtain
f ◦(≽X) = f ◦≽X ◦idX ≤f ◦≽X ◦f † ◦f ≤f ◦f † ◦≽Y ◦f ≤idY ◦≽Y ◦f = (≽Y ) ◦f,
so f is indeed a monotone map Xop →Y op. Now assume that f : Xop →Y op is a monotone map. Then it follows that f : Xopop →Y opop is a monotone map, and since Xopop = X and Y opop = Y , the statement follows.
6.12. Proposition. Let R be a dagger quantaloid. Then the assignment X 7→Xop extends to a functor (−)op : PreOrd(R) →PreOrd(R) that is the identity on morphisms.
Proof. Let X, Y and Z be preordered objects in R, and let f : X →Y and g : Y →Z be monotone maps. Using Lemma 6.11, we have idop X = idX = idXop, because the underlying object of X and Xop it the same. The lemma also yields (f ◦g)op = f ◦g = f op ◦gop, so (−)op is functorial.
Next, we provide an alternative description of order isomorphisms.
6.13. Lemma. Let R be a dagger quantaloid and let (X, ≼X) and (Y, ≼Y ) be preordered objects in R. Then a map f : X →Y is an order isomorphism if and only if it is a bijection such that f ◦≼X = ≼Y ◦f.
Proof. Let f be an order isomorphism. Then it is a monotone map, and there is a monotone map g : Y →X such that g◦f = idX and f◦g = idY . Then g = idY ◦g ≤f †◦f◦g = f †◦idY = fY , and g = g ◦idY ≥g ◦f ◦f † = idY ◦f † = f †, so f † = g. Thus f † ◦f = IX and f ◦f † = idY expressing that f is both injective and surjective, hence bijective. Moreover, since f and g are monotone, we obtain f ◦(≼X) ≤(≼Y )◦f and g◦(≼Y ) ≤(≼X)◦g. From the latter inequality we obtain ≼Y ◦f = idY ◦≼Y ◦f = f ◦g ◦≼Y ◦f ≤f ◦≼X ◦g ◦f = f ◦≼X ◦idX = f ◦≼X, whence f ◦≼X = ≼Y ◦f. Conversely, assume that f is a bijection such that f ◦≼X = ≼Y ◦f. It follows immediately that f is monotone. Since f is a bijection, we have f † ◦f = idX and f ◦f † = idY , whence f † : Y →X is also a map. Then f †◦≼Y = f †◦≼Y ◦idY = f †◦≼Y ◦f ◦f † = f †◦f ◦≼X ◦f † = idX ◦≼X ◦f † = ≼X ◦f †, so also f † is monotone.
6.14. Lemma. Let F : Q →R be a homomorphism of dagger quantaloids. Then for each preordered object (X, ≼) in Q, the pair (FX, F(≼)) is a preordered object in R, and the assignment (X, ≼) 7→(FX, F(≼)) extends to a functor PreOrd(F) : PreOrd(Q) →PreOrd(R) that acts on morphism by f 7→Ff. Moreover, PreOrd(F) is (fully) faithful if F is (fully) faithful.
Proof. Let (X, ≼X) be a preordered object in Q. The map FX,Y : Q(X, Y ) →R(FX, FY ), f 7→Ff preserves daggers and suprema, hence is monotone. Hence, idFX = F(idX) ≤ F(≼X), and F(≼X)◦F(≼X) = F(≼X ◦≼X) ≤F(≼X), so F(≼X) is a preorder on FX in R, which assures that PreOrd(F) is well defined on objects. Let (Y, ≼Y ) be another preordered object of Q, and let f : (X, ≼X) →(Y, ≼Y ) be a monotone map, i.e., f ◦(≼X) ≤(≼Y ) ◦f. Firstly, since the action of PreOrd(F) on morphisms coincides with the action of Maps(F) on morphisms, it follows from Lemma 5.10 that Ff : FX →FY is a map in R. We also obtain Ff ◦F(≼X) = F(f ◦≼X) ≤F(≼Y ◦f) = F(≼Y ) ◦Ff, hence Ff : (FX, F(≼X)) → (FY, F(≼Y )) is monotone. Thus, PreOrd(F) is also well defined on morphisms, and clearly it is functorial. Clearly, if F is faithful, so is PreOrd(F). Assume, in addition, that F is full, and let g : (FX, F(≼X)) →(FY, F(≼Y )) be a monotone map. In particular, it follows that g : FX →FY is a map in R, and by Lemma 5.10, it follows that there is a map f : X →Y in Q such that Ff = g. Since g is monotone, and F functorial, we have F(f ◦≼X) = g ◦F(≼X) ≤F(≼Y ) ◦g = F(≼Y ◦f). Now, since F is full, it follows from Lemma 2.50 that the map FX,Y : Q(X, Y ) →R(FX, FY ), f 7→Ff is an order isomorphism, whence f ◦(≼X) ≤(≼Y ) ◦f, so f is monotone. We conclude that PreOrd(F) is indeed full.
6.15. Lemma. Let (X, ≼X) and (Y, ≼Y ) be preordered objects in a dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid (R, ⊗, I). Then (X, ≼X) ⊗(Y, ≼Y ) := (X ⊗Y, ≼X ⊗≼Y ) is a preordered object as well.
Proof. Since (R, ⊗, I) is a dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid, the order relation on morphisms respects daggers and the monoidal product. Hence, we have idX⊗Y = idX ⊗idY ≤ ≼X ⊗≼Y , so ≼X ⊗≼Y is reflexive. We also have (≼X ⊗≼Y ) ◦(≼X ⊗≼Y ) = (≼X ◦≼X) ⊗ (≼Y ◦≼Y ) ≤≼X ⊗≼Y .
6.16. Lemma. Let (X, ≼X), (Y, ≼Y ), (W, ≼W) and (Z, ≼Z) be preordered objects in a dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid R. Let f : (X, ≼X) →(W, ≼W) and g : (Y, ≼Y ) →(Z, ≼Z) be monotone maps. Then f ⊗g : (X, ≼X) ⊗(Y, ≼Y ) →(W, ≼W) ⊗(Z, ≼Z) is a monotone map.
Proof. Using that the monoidal product in a symmetric monoidal quantaloid preserves the order in both arguments separately, we obtain (f ⊗g) ◦(≼X ⊗≼Y ) = (f ◦≼X) ⊗(g ◦≼Y ) ≤ (≼W ◦f) ⊗(≼Z ◦g) = (≼W ⊗≼Z) ◦(f ⊗g).
6.17. Theorem. Let (R, ⊗, I) be a dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid. The category PreOrd(R) becomes a symmetric monoidal category as follows:
• We define the monoidal product by (X, ≼X)⊗(Y, ≼Y ) := (X ⊗Y, ≼X ⊗≼Y ) on objects, and on monotone maps by the monoidal product of their underlying morphisms in R;
• The monoidal unit is (I, idI);
• the associator, unitors and symmetry between preordered objects are the respective associator, unitors and symmetry between the underlying objects of R.
Moreover, the inclusion functor J : Maps(R) →PreOrd(R), X 7→(X, idX) is strict monoidal, and left adjoint to the forgetful functor U : PreOrd(R) →Maps(R), (X, ≼) 7→X.
Proof. It follows from Lemmas 6.15 and 6.16 that ⊗: PreOrd(R)×PreOrd(R) →PreOrd(R) is a well defined bifunctor. By Lemma 5.11, Maps(R) inherits its monoidal structure from R. Let (X, ≼X), (Y, ≼Y ) and (Z, ≼Z) be preordered objects in R. We need to show that the associator αX,Y,Z : (X ⊗Y ) ⊗Z →X ⊗(Y ⊗Z), the left unitor λX : I ⊗X →X, the right unitor ρX : X ⊗I →X and the symmetry σX,Y : X ⊗Y →Y ⊗X are order isomorphisms, which in the light of Lemma 6.13 means that we have to show that
αX,Y,Z ◦((≼X ⊗≼Y ) ⊗≼Z) = (≼X ⊗(≼Y ⊗≼Z)) ◦αX,Y,Z, λX ◦(idI ⊗≼X) = ≼X ◦λX ρX ◦(≼X ⊗idI) = ≼X ◦ρX, σX,Y ◦(≼X ⊗≼Y ) = (≼Y ⊗≼X) ◦σY,X,
but this follows directly because α, λ, ρ, and σ are natural isomorphisms in R. Finally, it also follows from Example 6.4 and Lemma 6.8 that the assignment X 7→ (X, idX) extends to an inclusion functor Maps(R) →PreOrd(R). For any two object X and Y of Maps(R), we have JX ⊗JY = (X, idX) ⊗(Y, idY ) = (X ⊗Y, idX ⊗idY ) = (X ⊗Y, idX⊗Y ) = J(X ⊗Y ), and JI = (I, idI), from which follows that J is strict monoidal. To show that J is left adjoint to U, let X be an object of Maps(R), we need a candidate unit for the adjunction, so a map X →UJX. Since UJX = X, we can choose this map to be the identity idX. Now let (Y, ≼) be a preordered object of R, and let f : X →U(Y, ≼) = Y be a map. We need to show that there is a unique monotone map g : JX →(Y, ≼) such
that the following diagram commutes:
Since UJX = X and U(Y, ≼) = Y , the only possible choice would be g = f, for which we have to verify that f is a monotone map JX →(Y, ≼). But this follows directly from Lemma 6.8.
6.18. Proposition. Let F : (Q, ⊙, J) →(R, ⊗, I) be be a homomorphism of dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloids with coherence dagger isomorphisms ψ : J →FI and ψX,Y : FX ⊗FY →F(X ⊙Y ) for each X, Y ∈Q. Then PreOrd(F) defined in Lemma 6.14 is strong symmetric monoidal, with coherence isomorphisms ψ : (J, idJ) →F(I, idI) and ψ(X,≼X),(Y,≼Y ) : F(X, ≼X) ⊗F(Y, ≼Y ) →F(X, ≼X) ⊙F(Y, ≼Y ) induced directly by by the coherence dagger isomorphisms of F, namely ψ : J →FI and ψX,Y above.
Proof. Let (X, ≼X) and (Y, ≼Y ) be preorderd objects of Q. It follows from Proposition 5.12 that ψ and ψX,Y are bijective maps in R. We need to show that these maps are actually order isomorphisms. For ψ this is trivial. It remains to show that ψX,Y : F(X, ≼X) ⊗ F(Y, ≼Y ) →F((X, ≼X) ⊙(Y, ≼Y )) is an order isomorphism, , or equivalently, that ψX,Y : (FX ⊗FY, F(≼X) ⊗F(≼Y )) →(F(X ⊙Y ), F(≼X ⊙≼Y )) is an order isomorphism. By Lemma 6.13 it is sufficient to show that F(≼X ⊙≼Y ) ◦ψX,Y = ψX,Y ◦(F(≼X) ⊗F(≼Y )), but this follows from naturality of ψ.
6.19. Monotone relations.
6.20. Definition. Let (X, ≼X) and (Y, ≼Y ) be preordered objects in a dagger quantaloid R. We say that a morphism v : X →Y in R is a monotone relation (X, ≼X) →(Y, ≼Y ) if it satisfies one of the following two equivalent conditions (hence both):
(1) (≽Y ) ◦v ≤v and v ◦(≽X) ≤v.
(2) (≽Y ) ◦v = v = v ◦(≽X).
Clearly, (2) implies (1). For the other direction, we have v = idY ◦v ≤(≽Y ) ◦v, and v = v ◦idX ≤v ◦(≽X).
6.21. Example. Let (X, ≼X) be a preordered object in a dagger quantaloid R. Then ≽X is a monotone relation (X, ≼X) →(X, ≼X) as follows from the transitivity of ≽X.
6.22. Lemma. Let (X, ≼X), (Y, ≼Y ) and (Z, ≼Z) be preordered objects in a dagger quantaloid R and let r : X →Y and s : Y →Z be monotone relations. Then s ◦r : X →Z is a monotone relation.
Proof. The monotonicity of r and s implies that r = r ◦≽X and ≽Z ◦s = s, hence ≽Z ◦s ◦r = s ◦r = s ◦r ◦≽X.
It follows from the previous lemma that the following categories are well defined.
6.23. Definition. Let R be a dagger quantaloid. Then MonRel(R) is defined as the category of preordered objects in R and monotone relations. The identity monotone relation id(X,≼) on a preordered object (X, ≼) is the monotone relation ≽. Instead of MonRel(Rel) we write MonRel.
α∈A vα of (vα)α∈A in R.
6.24. Lemma. Let R be a dagger quantaloid. Then MonRel(R) is a quantaloid: If (X, ≼X) and (Y, ≼Y ) are preordered objects in R, then the supremum of a collection (vα)α∈A monotone relations (X, ≼X) →(Y, ≼Y ) is given by the supremum W
Proof. We need to show that W
α∈A rα is a monotone relation. Since R is a quantaloid, we find
6.25. Proposition. Let R be a dagger quantaloid with small dagger biproducts. Then MonRel(R) is a quantaloid with small biproducts. More specifically, let (Xα, ≼α)α∈A be a set-indexed family of preordered objects of R. Then L
α∈A(Xα, ≼α) = (X, ≼X) where X = L
α∈A ≼α. Moreover, if pXβ : X →Xβ and iXβ : Xβ →X denote the respective canonical projection and the canonical injection for each β ∈A, then:
α∈A(Xα, ≼α) →(Xβ, ≼β) is given by
• the canonical projection map p(Xβ,≼β) : L
≽Xβ ◦pXβ = pXβ ◦≽X; (9)
• the canonical injection map i(Xβ,≼β) : (Xβ, ≼β) →L
α∈A(Xα, ≼α) is given by
iXβ ◦≽Xβ = ≽X ◦iXβ. (10)
Proof. Firstly, by Proposition 2.63 we have idX = L
α∈A ≼α = ≼X, and ≼X ◦≼X =
α∈A ≼α = ≼X. Thus (X, ≼X) is a preordered object in R. By Lemma 2.31, we have ≽X = L
α∈A ≽α, whence (9) and (10) hold. These two equalities immediately imply that p(Xα,≼α) and i(Xα,≼α) are monotone relations for each α ∈A. By Lemma 6.24, MonRel(R) is a quantaloid. Using the characterization of biproducts in quantaloids in Proposition 2.61, we have pXβ ◦iXα = δα,β for each α, β ∈A, and W
α∈A iXα ◦ pXα = idX. From the first identity it follows that for each α, β ∈that
p(Xβ,≼β) ◦i(Xα,≼α) = ≽β ◦pXβ ◦iXα ◦≽α = ≽β ◦δXα,Xβ ◦≽α = δ(Xα,≼α),(Xβ,≼β).
From the second identity, and using that R is a quantaloid, so pre- and postcomposition preserve suprema, we obtain
α∈A ≽X ◦iXα ◦pXα ◦≽X = ≽X ◦
= ≽X ◦idX ◦≽X = ≽X = id(X,≼X).
Since suprema of parallel morphisms in MonRel(R) coincide with the suprema of these morphisms in R, it follows from Proposition 2.61 that (X, ≼X) = L
α∈A(Xα, ≼α) in MonRel(R) with projection and injection morphisms p(Xα,≼α) and i(Xα,≼α), respectively.
6.26. Lemma. Let R be a dagger quantaloid. The assignment X 7→Xop extends to a functor (−)op : MonRel(R) →MonRel(R)op, which acts on monotone relations v : X →Y by vop = v†. Moreover, this functor (−)op is involutory, hence an isomorphism of categories.
Proof. Let (X, ≼X), (Y, ≼Y ) and (Z, ≼Z) be preordered objects in R. Let v : (X, ≼X) → (Y, ≼Y ) be a monotone relation. Then v ◦≽X = v = ≽Y ◦v, hence ≼X ◦v† = v† = v† ◦≼Y , showing that v† : (Y, ≽Y ) →(X, ≽X) is a monotone relation. We check functoriality. We have idop (X,≼X) = (≽X)op = ≼X = id(X,≽X) = id(X,≼X)op, and if w : (Y, ≼Y ) →(Z, ≼Z) is another monotone relation, we have (w ◦v)op = (w ◦v)† = v† ◦w† = vop ◦wop. Finally, we have ((X, ≼X)op)op = (X, ≽X)op = (X, ≼X), and (vop)op = (v†)op = v†† = v, so (−)op is involutory.
6.27. Definition. Let R be a dagger quantaloid, let X ∈R be an object, and let (Y, ≼Y ) be a preordered object in R. For any morphism r : X →Y in R, we define r⋄: X →Y and r⋄: Y →X as the morphisms in R given by
r⋄:= (≽Y ) ◦r; r⋄:= r† ◦(≽Y )
6.28. Lemma. Let R be a dagger quantaloid. There are functors (−)⋄: PreOrd(R) → MonRel(R) and (−)⋄: PreOrd(R) →MonRel(R)op, which are the identity on objects, and which acts on monotone maps f : (X, ≼X) →(Y, ≼Y ) by f 7→f⋄and f 7→f ⋄, respectively (cf. Definition 6.27). Moreover, for each monotone map f : X →Y , the following identities hold: f⋄◦f ⋄≤id(Y,≼Y ), f ⋄◦f⋄≥id(X,≼X).
Proof. We first check that f⋄is a monotone relation if f : (X, ≼X) →(Y, ≼Y ) is a monotone map between preordered objects of R. We immediately find (≽Y ) ◦f⋄= (≽Y ) ◦(≽Y ) ◦f ≤ (≽Y ) ◦f = f⋄. By Lemma 6.11, f is also a monotone map (X, ≽X) →(Y, ≽Y ), whence f◦(≽X) ≤(≽Y )◦f. Moreover, we have hence f⋄◦(≽X) = (≽Y )◦f◦(≽X) ≤(≽Y )◦(≽Y )◦f ≤ (≽Y ) ◦f = f⋄. Next, we check functoriality. For idX : (X, ≼X) →(X, ≼Y ), we have (idX)⋄= (≽X) ◦idX = (≽X), which is indeed the identity monotone relation id(X,≼X) on (X, ≼X). Furthermore, given another preordered object (Z, ≼Z) and monotone map
g : (Y, ≼Y ) →(Z, ≼Z), we have
(g ◦f)⋄= (≽Z) ◦g ◦f = g⋄◦f = g⋄◦(≽Y ) ◦f = g⋄◦f⋄,
so (−)⋄is indeed a functor. In a similar way, one proves that (−)⋄is a contravariant functor. Finally, given a monotone map f : X →Y , two direct calculations yield: f⋄◦f ⋄= ≽Y ◦f ◦f † ◦≽Y ≤≽Y ◦≽Y ≤≽Y = id(Y,≼Y ), and f ⋄◦f⋄= f † ◦≽Y ◦≽Y ◦f = f † ◦≽Y ◦f ≥ f † ◦f ◦≽X ≥≽X = id(X,≼X).
We note that if R = Rel, then any monotone relation r : X →Y that has an upper adjoint s : Y →X in Rel, i.e., s ◦r ≥idX and r ◦s ≤idY , must be of the form r = f⋄ for some monotone map f : X →Y , in which case s = f ⋄[34, Footnote 3]. This does not hold in general. For instance, take R = qRel. In Example 2.66, we construct an invertible binary relation R : X →X in qRel that is not a dagger isomorphism, i.e., the inverse S of R does not equal R†. Since S is the inverse of R, it is its upper adjoint in qRel. When we equip X with the trivial order, then R becomes a monotone relation. If a monotone map F : X →X such that F⋄= R exists, then it must be equal to R for the order on X is trivial. In order for F to be a map, F † must be its upper adjoint in qRel, but since upper adjoints are unique, we would obtain R† = F † = S, which is a contradiction.
6.29. Proposition. For any dagger quantaloid R the following diagram commutes:
MonRel(R) MonRel(R)op
Proof. Let (X, ≼X) be a preordered object in R. Then
((X, ≼X)op)⋄= (X, ≽X)⋄= (X, ≽X) = (X, ≼X)op = ((X, ≼X)op)⋄.
Let (Y, ≼Y ) be another preordered object in R and let f : (X, ≼X) →(Y, ≼Y ) be a monotone map. Then:
[[f : (X, ≼X) →(Y, ≼Y )]op]⋄= [f : (X, ≽X) →(Y, ≽Y )]⋄
= f † ◦≼Y : (Y, ≽Y ) →(X, ≽X) = [≽Y ◦f : (X, ≼X) →(Y, ≼Y )]op
= [[f : (X, ≼X) →(Y, ≼Y )]⋄]op.
Recall Lemma 6.15 that states that the monoidal product (X, ≼X) ⊗(Y, ≼Y ) := (X ⊗ Y, ≼X ⊗≼Y ) of preordered objects in a dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid (Q, ⊗, I) is again a preordered object. We now define the monoidal product of monotone relations
between preordered objects.
6.30. Lemma. Let (X, ≼X), (Y, ≼Y ), (W, ≼W) and (Z, ≼Z) be preordered objects in a dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid (R, ⊗, I). Let r : (X, ≼X) →(W, ≼W) and s : (Y, ≼Y ) → (Z, ≼Z). Then r ⊗s : (X, ≼X) ⊗(Y, ≼Y ) →(W, ≼W) ⊗(Z, ≼Z) is a monotone relation.
Proof. By a direct calculation: (≽W ⊗≽Z) ◦(r ⊗s) = (≽W ◦r) ⊗(≽Z ◦r) = r ⊗s = (r ◦≽X) ⊗(s ◦≽Y ) = (r ⊗s) ◦(≽X ⊗≽Y ).
6.31. Proposition. Let (R, ⊗, I) be a dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid. Then MonRel(R) is a symmetric monoidal quantaloid if we equip it with a monoidal product ⊗as follows:
• The monoidal product ⊗coincides with the monoidal product on PreOrd(R) as defined in Theorem 6.17, i.e., (X, ≼X) ⊗(Y, ≼Y ) = (X ⊗Y, ≼X ⊗≼Y );
• the monoidal product r ⊗s of monotone relations r and s is given by the monoidal product of r and s in R;
• the monoidal unit is given by (I, idI);
• if α, λ, ρ and σ denote the respective associator, left unitor, right unitor and symmetry of (PreOrd(R), ⊗, (I, idI)), then the associator, left unitor, right unitor and symmetry of MonRel(R) are given by α⋄, λ⋄, ρ⋄, and σ⋄, respectively.
Proof. Since ⊗is a symmetric monoidal product on R, it follows from Lemma 6.30 that it induces a bifunctor on MonRel(R). By Theorem 6.17, the underlying morphisms in R of the components of the associator, left unitor, right unitor and symmetry of PreOrd(R) are monotone maps, hence the components of α⋄, λ⋄, ρ⋄and σ⋄are indeed monotone relations. We verify the naturality of these morphisms. So for i = 1, 2, let (Xi, ≼Xi), (Yi, ≼Yi) and (Zi, ≼Zi) be preordered objects in R, and let u : X1 →X2, v : Y1 →Y2 and w : Z1 →Z2 be monotone relations. Then
(αX2,Y2,Z2)⋄◦((u ⊗v) ⊗w) = (≽X2 ⊗(≽Y2 ⊗≽Z2)) ◦αX2,Y2,Z2 ◦((u ⊗v) ⊗w) = (≽X2 ⊗(≽Y2 ⊗≽Z2)) ◦(u ⊗(v ⊗w)) ◦αX1,Y1,Z1 = (u ⊗(v ⊗w)) ◦(≽X1 ⊗(≽Y1 ⊗≽Z1)) ◦αX1,Y1,Z1 = (u ⊗(v ⊗w)) ◦(αX1,Y1,Z1)⋄,
where we used naturality of α is associator of R in the second equality, and the fact that u, v and w, hence also u⊗(v ⊗w) are monotone relations in the third equality. For the unitors and the symmetry the proof proceeds analogously. Then, since α, λ, ρ, and σ satisfy the coherence conditions for symmetric monoidal categories, and (−)⋄is a functor, it follows that α⋄, λ⋄, ρ⋄, and σ⋄satisfy the same coherence conditions. So MonRel(R) is indeed a symmetric monoidal category. Moreover, MonRel(R) is a quantaloid where the supremum of parallel monotone relations is calculated in R by Lemma 6.24. Since also the monoidal product of morphism in MonRel(R) is the same as the monoidal product of morphism in R, which, by assumption is a symmetric monoidal quantaloid, it follows that the monoidal product on MonRel(R) preserves suprema in both arguments separately. Thus (MonRel(R), ⊗, (I, idI)) is a symmetric monoidal quantaloid.
6.32. Theorem. Let (R, ⊗, I) be a dagger compact quantaloid with respective unit and counit morphisms ηX : I →X∗⊗X and ϵX : X ⊗X∗→I for each object X. Then (MonRel(R), ⊗, (I, idI)) is a compact quantaloid with respective unit and counit morphism η(X,≼) : (I, idI) →(X, ≼)∗⊗(X, ≼) and ϵ(X,≼) : (X, ≼) ⊗(X, ≼)∗→(I, idI) given by η(X,≼) := (≽∗⊗≽) ◦ηX and ϵ(X,≼) := ϵX ◦(≽⊗≽∗).
Proof. By Proposition 6.31, MonRel(R) is a symmetric monoidal quantaloid. Let (X, ≼) be a preordered object of R. Since ≼◦≼≤≼, and idX ≤≼, we have ≼= idX ◦≼≤≼◦≼≤≼, whence ≼◦≼= ≼, so preorders are idempotent. will use this in the remainder of proof without mentioning it. Note that by Lemma 2.11, we have (≼∗)† = (≼†)∗= ≽∗. Note furthermore that if f : (X, ≼) →(Y, ≼Y ) is an order isomorphism between preordered objects, functoriality of (−)⋄yields that f⋄is also invertible in MonRel(R), and (f⋄)−1 = (f −1)⋄= ≽◦f. We simply write f −1 instead of (f⋄)−1 or (f −1)⋄. We have show to that the unit and counit satisfy the zigzag identities of a compact closed category, for which we used string diagrams. By definition, we have the following identities.
Furthermore, we have the following identities, where the first is the first zigzag identity for R as a compact category, the second by Lemma 2.11, and the third by combining reflexivity and transitivity in the definition of a preorder, respectively:
Then, suppressing associators and unitors, as usual with string diagrams, we find:
In a similar way, we show that MonRel(R) satisfy the second zigzag identity of compactclosed categories, which proves the statement.
6.33. Proposition. Let F : (Q, ⊙, J) →(R, ⊗, I) be a homomorphism of dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloids. Then there is a homomorphism of symmetric monoidal quantaloids MonRel(F) : MonRel(Q) →MonRel(R) defined as follows:
• on objects by (X, ≼) 7→(FX, F(≼));
• on morphisms by v 7→Fv.
Moreover, MonRel(F) is (fully) faithful if F is (fully) faithful.
Proof. By Lemma 6.14, the action of MonRel(F) is well defined on objects. Let v : (X, ≼X) →(Y, ≼Y ) be a monotone relation in Q, so (≼Y ) ◦v = v = v ◦(≼X). Then, by functoriality of F, we have F(≼Y ) ◦Fv = Fv = Fv ◦F(≼Y ), so Fv : (FX, F(≼X)) → (FY, F(≼Y )) is a monotone relation in R. The functoriality of MonRel(F) clearly follows from the functoriality of F. By Lemma 6.24, MonRel(Q) and MonRel(R) are quantaloids, and the suprema of parallel morphisms in these quantaloids can be calculated in Q and R, respectively. Since F is a homomorphism of dagger quantaloids, it preserves suprema of parallel morphisms, whence MonRel(F) is a homomorphism of quantaloids. Assume F is faithful. Then it follows immediately that also MonRel(F) is faithful. Now assume, in addition, that F is full, and let w : (FX, F(≼X)) →(FY, F(≼Y )) be a monotone relation, so F(≼Y ) ◦w = w = w ◦F(≼X). In particular, we have that w : FX →FY is a morphism in R, hence since F is full, there must be some morphism v : X →Y in Q such that Fv = w. Then, by functoriality of F, we find F(≼Y ◦v) = Fv = F(v ◦≼X), and since F is faithful, we find (≼Y ) ◦v = v = v ◦(≼X), i.e., v : (X, ≼X) →(Y, ≼Y ) is a monotone relation. We conclude that MonRel(F) is full. Let (X, ≼X) and (Y, ≼Y ) be objects of MonRel(Q). Then they are objects of PreOrd(Q) as well, and the monoidal product (X, ≼X) ⊙(Y, ≼Y ) in MonRel(Q) and in PreOrd(Q) coincides by Proposition 6.31. Similarly, F(X, ≼X)⊗F(Y, ≼Y ) coincides in MonRel(R) and PreOrd(R). Since PreOrd(F) is strong symmetric monoidal by Proposition 6.18, we have coherence order isomorphisms ψ(X,≼X),(Y,≼Y ) : F(X, ≼X)⊗F(Y, ≼Y ) →F((X, ≼X)⊙(Y, ≼Y )) and ψ : (J, idJ) →F(I, idI). Then (ψ(X,≼X),(Y,≼Y ))⋄: F(X, ≼X) ⊗F(Y, ≼Y ) →F((X, ≼X) ⊙ (Y, ≼Y )) and ψ⋄: (J, idJ) →F(I, idI) form coherence isomorphisms for MonRel(F), hence the latter functor is strong symmetric monoidal.

7. The embedding of sets
For the next lemma, recall the quantaloid 2 (cf. Example 2.46).
7.1. Lemma. Let (Q, ⊗, I) be a nontrivial dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid. Then the functor IQ : 2 →Q that acts on the single object by 1 7→I, and on the morphisms by 1 7→idI and 0 7→0I is faithful. Moreover, if Q has precisely two scalars, then IQ is full.
7.2. Theorem. Let (R, ⊗, I) be a nontrivial dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid with small dagger biproducts. Let ‘(−) : Rel →R be the functor that maps any set A to ‘A :=
α∈A I, and that maps any binary relation r : A →B between sets to the morphism ‘r : ‘A →‘B whose matrix element (‘r)α,β is given by
idI, (α, β) ∈r, 0I, (α, β) /∈r,
for each α ∈A and each β ∈B. Then ‘(−) is a faithful homomorphism of dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloids that preserve all dagger biproducts. Moreover, if R has precisely two scalars, then ‘(−) is full.
Proof. Since R has small dagger biproducts, it follows from Proposition 3.18 that the functors PR : Matr(R) →R defined in Theorem 2.68 is an equivalence of dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloids. By Proposition 3.19, the functor Matr(IR) : Matr(2) →Matr(R) defined in Theorem 2.68 is a homomorphism of dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloids that is faithful, because IR is faithful, and that is full if R has precisely two scalars. Furthermore, by Example 3.21, the functor F2 : Rel →Matr(2) from Proposition 2.67 is an equivalence of dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloids. We now precisely have ‘(−) = PQ ◦Matr(IQ) ◦F2, which is a faithful homomorphism of dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloids since it is a composition of faithful homomorphisms of dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloids. We saw that if R has precisely two scalars, then Matr(IR) is also full, in which case clearly also ‘(−) is full. Finally, by Proposition 2.64 it follows that ‘(−) preserves dagger biproducts.
By the identifications Set = Maps(Rel), PreOrd = PreOrd(Rel) and MonRel = MonRel(Rel), and the functoriality of Maps (cf. Proposition 5.12), PreOrd (cf. Proposition 6.18) and MonRel (Proposition 6.33), Theorem 7.2 immediately yields the following corollaries:
7.3. Corollary. Let (R, ⊗, I) be a nontrivial dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid with small dagger biproducts. Then ‘(−) : Rel →R restricts and corestricts to a faithful strong symmetric monoidal functor Maps(‘(−)) : Set →Maps(R). Moreover, if R has precisely two scalars, this functor is full as well.
7.4. Corollary. Let (R, ⊗, I) be a nontrivial dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid with all small dagger biproducts. Then there is a faithful strong symmetric monoidal functor PreOrd(‘(−)) : PreOrd →PreOrd(R), which:
• is defined on objects by (A, ⊑) 7→(‘A, ‘⊑);
• is defined on morphisms by f 7→‘f;
• is full if R has precisely two scalars.
7.5. Corollary. Let (R, ⊗, I) be a nontrivial dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid with small dagger biproducts. Then we have a faithful homomorphism of symmetric monoidal quantaloid MonRel(‘(−)) : MonRel →MonRel(R) that preserves all biproduct that sends
any preordered set (A, ⊑A) to (‘A, ‘⊑A) and any monotone relation v : (A, ⊑A) →(B, ⊑B) to ‘v. Moreover, MonRel(‘(−)) preserves small biproducts. If R has precisely two scalars, then MonRel(‘(−)) is full.
7.6. Convention. With abuse of notation, we will denote the functors induced by ‘(−) : Rel →R in Corollaries 7.3, 7.4 and 7.5 as well by ‘(−).
7.7. Proposition. Let (R, ⊗, I) be a nontrivial dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid with all small dagger biproducts. Let S = Maps(R). Then the embedding ‘(−) : Set →S has a right adjoint given by S(I, −).
Proof. Given a set A, the A-component ηA : A →S(I, ‘A) of the unit η of the adjunction is defined by ηA(α) = iα for each α ∈A, where iα : I →‘A is the canonical injection of I into the α-th factor of ‘A = L
α∈A Iα. We note that iα is a map in R by Proposition 5.13, hence ηA is well defined. Now, let X be an object of S, and let f : A →S(I, X) be a function. We define g : ‘A →X as the morphism [f(α)]α∈A. Since f(α) : I →X is a map in R for each α ∈A, it follows from Proposition 5.13 that g is a map in R, so a morphism in S. Then for each β ∈A, we have S(I, g) ◦ηA(β) = g ◦ηA(β) = g ◦iβ = [f(α)]α∈A ◦iβ = f(β), so S(I, g) ◦ηA = f. Given any other map h : ‘A →X such that S(I, h) ◦ηA = f, we have f(α) = S(I, h) ◦ηA(α) = h ◦ηA(α) = h ◦iα for each α ∈A, which shows that h = [f(α)]α∈A = g.
In the following, we investigate when there is an object Ωin a dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid (R, ⊗, I) for which there is a bijection between R(X, I) ∼= Maps(R)(X, Ω). This will be of importance for the next section in which we investigate the existence of power objects.
7.8. Lemma. Let (R, ⊗, I) be an affine dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid with small dagger biproducts. Let X be an object of R, let A be a set, and let (fα)α∈A be a set-indexed family in R(X, I). Write f = ⟨fα⟩α∈A : X →‘A. Then:
(a) f ◦f † ≤id‘A if and only if fα ⊥fβ for every district α, β ∈A;
(b) f † ◦f ≥idX if and only if W
Proof. We denote the embedding of I onto the α-th factor of ‘A by iα. Its corresponding projection is denoted by pα, which satisfies pα = i† α. Proposition 2.32 yields (f ◦f †)α,β = fβ ◦f † α for each α, β ∈A. By Lemma 2.28, we have (id‘A)α,β = δα,β for each α, β ∈A. It now follows from Proposition 2.63 that f ◦f † ≤id‘A if and only if fα ◦f † α ≤idI for each α ∈A and fα ◦f † β ≤0I =⊥I (using Lemma 2.53) for each α ̸= β. Since by assumption, (R, ⊗, I) is affine, idI is the largest scalar, hence the former condition always holds, whereas the second condition translates to fα ⊥fβ for α ̸= β. For (b), let gα = f † α : I →X, and let g = [gα]α∈A : ‘A →X. Then f = g† by Proposition 2.32, which also yields f †◦f = g◦g† = W
α∈A f † α◦fα, from which the statement follows.
7.9. Proposition. Let (R, ⊗, I) be an affine dagger compact quantaloid with dagger kernels such that every object has exactly one ⊥-mono effect. Then an effect r : X →I is a ⊥-mono if and only if r† ◦r ≥idX.
Proof. By Theorem 4.26, the homsets of R are orthomodular lattices under the orthogonality relation ⊥given by f ⊥g if and only if Tr(f◦g†) =⊥I. Assume r†◦r ≥idX. Let s : Z →X be a morphism such that r†◦r◦s =⊥Z,X. Then ⊥Z,X= r†◦r◦s ≥idX◦s = s, forcing s =⊥Z,X. Hence, r† ◦r a ⊥-mono and it follows from Lemma 4.16 that also r is a ⊥-zero in R. Conversely, assume r is a ⊥-mono. Let p = r† ◦r. Then p† = p. Let f : X →X such that p ⊥f. Then ⊥I= Tr(f ◦p†) = Tr(f ◦p) = Tr(f ◦r† ◦r) = Tr(r◦f ◦r†) = r◦f ◦r†, since r◦f ◦r† is a scalar. Since r is a ⊥-mono, it follows that f◦r† =⊥I,X, hence r◦f † =⊥X,I. Again, since r is a ⊥-mono, it follows f † =⊥X, so also f =⊥X. Thus we have shown that f ⊥p implies f =⊥X. Since R is a dagger compact quantaloid, it follows from Lemma 3.12 that the trace preserves arbitrary suprema. Hence, Tr(¬p ◦id† X) = Tr(¬p) = W{Tr(f) : f ⊥p} = Tr(⊥X) =⊥I. We conclude that ¬p ⊥idX, i.e., idX ≤¬¬p = p.
7.10. Theorem. Let (R, ⊗, I) be an affine dagger compact quantaloid with small dagger biproducts and dagger kernels such that for each object X of R:
(1) there is a ⊥-monic effect X →I;
(2) every ⊥-monic PER on X is a equivalence relation on X.
Then for each object X of R and each set A, any morphism f = ⟨fα⟩α∈A : X →‘A is a map if and only if fα ⊥fβ for each distinct α, β ∈A and W
Proof. For any object X it follows from Proposition 5.16 that ⊤X,I is the unique ⊥-monic effect on X. Now, if f : X →‘A is a map, it follows from Lemma 7.8 that fα ⊥fβ for distinct α, β ∈A and that W
α∈A f † α ◦fα ≥idX. Then, using that R is a dagger quantaloid, we obtain
α∈A fα is a ⊥-monic effect on X by Proposition 7.9. Since ⊤X,I is the unique ⊥-monic effect on X, we conclude that W
α∈A fα = ⊤X,I. Conversely, assume that f : X →‘A satisfies fα ⊥fβ for distinct α, β ∈A and that
α∈A fα = ⊤X,I. It follows from Lemma 7.8 that f ◦f † ≤id‘A. Moreover, since ⊤X,I is a ⊥-mono, it follows that W
α∈A fα is a ⊥-mono. For each α ∈A, let sα = f † α ◦fα. Let s = W
α∈A sα. We are done if we can show that s ≥idX. Firstly, we clearly have s† α = sα for each α ∈A, whence s† = s for R is a dagger quantaloid. For each α ∈A, since fα ◦f † α is a scalar and R is affine, we have fα ◦f † α ≤idI, hence sα ◦sα = f † α ◦fα ◦f † α ◦fα ≤f † α ◦idI ◦fα = sα. Now assume that α and β in A are distinct. By assumption, fα ⊥fβ, so fα ◦f † β = Tr(fα ◦f † β) =⊥I, using Proposition 2.13 in the first equality. Hence, sα ◦sβ = f † α ◦fα ◦f † β ◦fβ =⊥X. Then
α∈A sα = s, so s is symmetric and transitive, hence a PER.
We claim that s is a ⊥-mono. So let r : Y →X be a morphism such that s ◦r =⊥Y,X. Since R is a quantaloid, this implies W
α∈A sα◦r =⊥Y,X, which is only possible if sα◦r =⊥Y,X for each α ∈A. Then r† ◦f † α ◦fα ◦r = r† ◦sα ◦r =⊥Y = 0Y for each α ∈A, where we used Lemma 2.53 in the last equality. Since R has small dagger biproducts, it has a zero object, hence it is a dagger kernel category by Proposition 4.11. As a consequence, we may apply Lemma 2.74 to conclude that fα ◦r = 0Y,I =⊥Y,I for each α ∈A. Hence, ⊥Y,I= W
α∈A fα ◦r = ⊤X,I ◦r, which implies r =⊥Y,X for ⊤X,I is a ⊥-mono. So s is indeed a ⊥-mono. It now follows from assumption (2) that s ≥idX, i.e., W
7.11. Corollary. Let (R, ⊗, I) be an affine dagger compact quantaloid with small dagger biproducts and dagger kernels such that for each object X of R:
(1) there is a ⊥-monic effect X →I;
(2) every ⊥-monic PER on X is a equivalence relation on X.
Let Ω= I ⊕I, and denote the projection Ω→I on the first factor by p0, and the projection on the second factor by p1. Then for each object X, we have a bijection
Maps(R)(X, Ω) →R(X, I), f 7→p1 ◦f
whose inverse is given by r 7→⟨¬r, r⟩, where ¬r is defined as in Lemma 4.20.
Proof. For any object X it follows from Proposition 5.16 that ⊤X,I is the unique ⊥monic effect on X. Hence, we can apply Theorem 4.26 to conclude that homsets in R are orthomodular lattices with respect to the orthocomplementation ¬. Let φ be the map R(X, I) →Maps(R)(X, Ω), r 7→⟨¬r, r⟩. It follows directly from Theorem 7.10 that φ is well defined. Denote the map Maps(R)(X, Ω) →R(X, I), f 7→p1 ◦f by ψ. Let r ∈R(X, I). Then ψ ◦φ(r) = ψ(⟨¬r, r⟩) = p1 ◦⟨¬r, r⟩= r. Let f : X →Ωbe a map. Let f1 = p1 ◦f and f0 = p0 ◦f, so f = ⟨f0, f1⟩as morphism in R. Theorem 7.10, we have f0 ⊥f1 and f0 ∨f1 = ⊤X,I, so f0 = ¬f1. As a consequence, φ ◦ψ(f) = φ(p1 ◦f) = φ(f1) = ⟨¬f1, f1⟩= ⟨f0, f1⟩= f. We conclude that φ and ψ are each other’s inverses, which proves the statement.
7.12. Lemma. Let (R, ⊗, I) be an affine dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloid with dagger biproducts. Let 2 be the two-point set {0, 1} ordered by ⊑via 0 ⊑1. Let Ω= ‘2 with projections p0 and p1 on the respective zero-th and first component of Ω, and let ≼Ω= ‘(⊑). Then the following identities hold:
p0 ◦≼Ω= p0, p1 ◦≼Ω= ⊤Ω,I, p1 ◦≽Ω= p1, p0 ◦≽Ω= ⊤Ω,I.
Proof. We first prove the statement for Rel, that is, we prove that
q0 ◦(⊑) = q0, q1 ◦(⊑) = ⊤2,1, q1 ◦(⊒) = q1, q0 ◦(⊒) = ⊤2,1.
Here, for α = 0, 1, qα : 2 →1 denotes the canonical projection on the α-th factor, q0 = {(0, ∗)} and q1 = {(1, ∗)} if we regard q0, q1 as subsets of 2 × 1. Then, for each α ∈2, we have (α, ∗) ∈q0◦⊑is and only if there is some β ∈2 such that α ⊑β and (β, ∗) ∈q0. The latter condition forces that β = 0, which forces α = 0, i.e., q0 ◦(⊑) = q0, and in a similar way, we obtain q1 ◦(⊒) = q1. For each α ∈2, we have (α, ∗) ∈q1 ◦(⊑) if and only if there is some β ∈2 such that α ⊑β and (β, ∗) ∈q1. The latter condition forces β = 1, and since α ⊑1 for each α ∈2, it follows that q1 ◦(⊑) = ⊤2,1. In a similar way, we find q0 ◦(⊒) = ⊤2,1. For the general case, we use that ‘2 = Ω, ‘1 = I and ‘(⊑) = ≼Ω. By Theorem 7.2, ‘(−) preserves daggers and dagger biproducts, hence we have ≽Ω= ≼† Ω= (‘⊑)† = ‘(⊑†) = ‘(⊒) and ‘q0 = p0 and ‘q1 = p1. Since R is affine, the theorem also assures that ‘⊤2,1 = ⊤Ω,I. The statement now follows from functoriality of ‘(−).
7.13. Proposition. Let (R, ⊗, I) be an affine dagger compact quantaloid with small dagger biproducts and dagger kernels such that for each object X of R:
(1) there is a unique ⊥-monic effect X →I;
(2) every ⊥-monic PER on X is a equivalence relation on X.
Let 2 be the ordinary set {0, 1} ordered by ⊑defined by 0 ⊑1. Let Ω= ‘2 with projection on the second factor denoted by p1, and let ≼Ω= ‘(⊑). Then for each preorderd objects (X, ≼X) in R, the map
PreOrd(R) (X, ≼X), (Ω, ≼Ω) →MonRel(R) (X, ≼X), (I, idI) f 7→p1 ◦f
Proof. Note that Ωcoincides the Ωin Corollary 7.11. By that same corollary, we have a bijection Maps(R)(X, Ω) →R(X, I), f 7→p1 ◦f.
Let f : (X, ≼X) →(Ω, ≼Ω) be a monotone map. By Lemma 6.11 also f : (X, ≽X) →(Ω, ≽Ω) is monotone, i.e., f ◦≽X ≤≽Ω◦f. Then, using Lemma 7.12, we find idI ◦p1 ◦f = p1 ◦f = p1 ◦≽Ω◦f ≥p1 ◦f ◦≽X, which shows that p1 ◦f : (X, ≼X) →(I, idI) is a monotone relation. If g : (X, ≼X) →(Ω, ≼Ω) is another monotone map such that p1 ◦f = p1 ◦g, then it follows from Corollary 7.11 that f = g, so the map f 7→p1 ◦f in the statement is injective. We proceed with showing surjectivity. So let v : (X, ≼X) →(I, idI) be a monotone relation. In particular, v ∈R(X, I), hence by Corollary 7.11 there is a map f : X →Ωsuch that p1 ◦f = v. We only need to show that f is monotone. First, we show that ⊤Ω,I ◦f is a ⊥-mono. So let r : Y →X be a morphism in R such that ⊤Ω,I ◦f ◦r =⊥Y,I. Since ⊤Ω,I is a ⊥-mono, we obtain f ◦r =⊥Y,Ω. Then ⊥Y,X= f †◦⊥Y,Ω= f † ◦f ◦r ≥r for f is a map, whence r =⊥Y,X. So, ⊤Ω,I ◦f is a ⊥-mono X →I, and since by Proposition 5.16 ⊤X,I is the unique ⊥-monic effect X →I, we must have ⊤X,I = ⊤Ω,I ◦f. Then, again using Lemma 7.12, we obtain p0 ◦f ◦≽X ≤⊤X,I = ⊤Ω,I ◦f = p0 ◦≽Ω◦f
and p1 ◦f ◦≽X = v ◦≽X = v = p1 ◦f = p1 ◦≽Ω◦f.
It now follows from (a) of Proposition 2.63 that f ◦≽X ≤≽Ω◦f, so f is monotone.

8. Power objects
Dagger quantaloids can be regarded as categorical generalizations of the category Rel, which allows different examples than allegories - other categorical generalizations of Rel. In the theory of allegories, the notion of power objects is very important, since there is a relation between allegories with power objects and topoi - categorical generalizations of the category Set. The following definition is inspired by the definition of power objects in allegories.
8.1. Definition. We say that a dagger quantaloid R has power objects if the embedding Maps(R) →R has a right adjoint.
8.2. Existence of power objects. In this subsection, we explore conditions that assure the existence of power objects in dagger quantaloids. We first state a more general theorem for which neither a quantaloid structure nor daggers are necessary. We note that in the theorem below, the object Ωcan be interpreted as an object of truth values, and ω can be interpreted as the dagger of a morphism that represents the element ‘true’ in Ω. The proof of the theorem is heavily inspired by the proof of [32, Theorem 9.2].
8.3. Theorem. Let (R, ⊗, I) be a compact-closed category and let (S, ⊙, J) be a symmetric monoidal closed category with internal hom [−, −] and evaluation morphism EvalA,B : [A, B] ⊗A →B for objects A, B of S. Let E : S →R be a strict monoidal functor that is bijective on objects. Assume that there is an object Ω∈S and an R-morphism ω : E(Ω) →I such that for each object A ∈S, we have a bijection
S(A, Ω) =−→R(E(A), I), f 7→ω ◦E(f). (11)
For each object X ∈R, let P(X) := [E−1(X∗), Ω]. Then the assignment X 7→P(X) extends to a functor P : R →S that is right adjoint to E. The X-component of the co-unit ∋of this adjunction is the unique R-morphism ∋X: EP(X) →X such that
ω ◦E(EvalE−1(X∗),Ω) = ⌞∋X⌟. (12)
Before we prove the theorem, we need some lemmas. The first one follows directly from the monoidal closure of S:
8.4. Lemma. For any A in S and each X in R, we have a bijection
S(A, P(X)) =−→S(A ⊗E−1(X∗), Ω), f 7→EvalE−1(X∗),Ω◦(f ⊗idE−1(X∗)).
We construct the counit of the theorem in the second lemma.
8.5. Lemma. For each X in R there is a unique morphism ∋X: EP(X) →X in R such that (12) holds.
Proof. Since EvalE−1(X∗),Ωis a S-morphism P(X) ⊗E−1(X∗) →Ω, it follows from the assumption (11) that ω◦E(EvalE−1(X∗),Ω) is an R-morphism E(P(X)⊗E−1(X∗)) →I. Since E is strict monoidal, we have that ω ◦J(EvalE−1(X∗),Ω) is an R-morphism EP(X)⊗X∗→I. The existence of ∋X such that (12) holds follows now from Lemma 2.8.
Proof of Theorem 8.3. Let A be an object of S and let X an object of S. We need to show that for each R-morphism v : E(A) →X there is a unique S-morphism fv : A →P(X) such that the following diagram commutes:
We define fv in steps. Since v ∈R(E(A), X), it follows from Lemma 2.8 that ⌞v⌟∈ R(E(A) ⊗X∗, I). Since E is strict monoidal and bijective on objects, we have ⌞v⌟∈ R(E(A ⊗E−1(X∗)), I). Hence, by the assumption (11), there is a unique S-morphism kv ∈S(A ⊗E−1(X∗), Ω) such that
ω ◦E(kv) = ⌞v⌟. (13)
Now, by Lemma 8.4, there is a unique fv ∈S(A, P(X)) such that
kv = EvalE−1(X∗),Ω◦(fv ⊗idE−1(X∗)). (14)
We check that the diagram in the statement commutes. We have
⌞∋X ◦E(fv))⌟= ϵX ◦((∋X ◦E(fv)) ⊗idX∗) = ϵX ◦(∋X ⊗idX∗) ◦(E(fv) ⊗idX∗) = ⌞∋X⌟◦(E(fv) ⊗idX∗) = ω ◦E(EvalE−1(X∗),Ω) ◦(E(fv) ⊗idX∗)
= ω ◦E EvalE−1(X∗),Ω◦(fv ⊗idE−1(X∗))
where we used (12) proven in Lemma 8.5 in the fourth equality, functoriality of E and the fact that E is strict monoidal in the fifth equality (note that E(idE−1(X∗)) = idEE−1(X∗) = idX∗), the definition of fv, i.e., equation (14), in the penultimate equality, and the definition of kv, i.e., equation (13) in the last equality. It now follows from Lemma 2.8 that ∋X ◦E(fv) = v, i.e., the diagram commutes. Next, we check that fv is the unique S-morphism for which the diagram commutes. So assume that g : A →P(X) is a S-morphism such that ∋X ◦E(g) = v.
Then ∋X ◦E(g) =∋X ◦E(fv), hence
ω ◦E(EvalE−1(X∗),Ω◦(g ⊗idE−1(X∗)) = ω ◦E(EvalE−1(X∗),Ω) ◦(E(g) ⊗idX∗) = ⌞∋⌟◦(E(g) ⊗idX∗) = ϵX ◦(∋X ⊗idX∗) ◦(E(g) ⊗idX∗) = ϵX ◦((∋X ◦E(g)) ⊗idX∗) = ϵX ◦((∋X ◦E(fv)) ⊗idX∗) = ϵX ◦(∋X ⊗idX∗) ◦(E(fv) ⊗idX∗) = ⌞∋X⌟◦(E(fv) ⊗idX∗) = ω ◦E(EvalE−1(X),Ω) ◦(E(fv) ⊗idX∗) = ω ◦E(EvalE−1(X∗),Ω◦(fv ⊗idE−1(X∗))),
where we used functoriality of E and the fact that E is strict monoidal in the first and last equalities, whereas we used Lemma 8.5 in the second and penultimate equalities. It now follows from the assumption (11) that
EvalE−1(X∗),Ω◦(g ⊗idE−1(X∗)) = EvalE−1(X∗),Ω◦(fv ⊗idE−1(X∗)).
We can now apply Lemma 8.4 to conclude that g = fv.
8.6. Corollary. Let (R, ⊗, I) be an affine dagger compact quantaloid with small dagger biproducts and dagger kernels such that for each object X of R:
(1) there is a ⊥-monic effect X →I;
(2) every ⊥-monic PER on X is an equivalence relation on X.
If S = Maps(R) is symmetric monoidal closed, then the embedding E : S →R has a right adjoint P. More precisely, if Ω= I ⊕I, and ω : Ω→I be the projection of Ωonto the second factor, and if [−, −] and Eval denote the internal hom and the evaluation of S, respectively, then P is defined on objects X of S by P(X) = [X∗, Ω]. The X-component of the counit ∋is the unique morphism ∋X: P(X) →X satisfying ω ◦EvalX∗,Ω= ⌞∋X⌟.
Proof. This follows from combining Corollary 7.11 and Theorem 8.3, taking E to be the inclusion and ω = p1.
8.7. Corollary. Let (R, ⊗, I) be an affine dagger compact quantaloid with small dagger biproducts and dagger kernels such that for each object X of R:
(1) ⊤X,I is a ⊥-monic effect;
(2) every ⊥-monic PER on X is an equivalence relation on X.
If PreOrd(R) is symmetric monoidal closed, then the functor (−)⋄: PreOrd(R) →MonRel(R) has a right adjoint D.
More precisely, let (Ω, ≼Ω) = ‘(2, ⊑), where the order ⊑on 2 = {0, 1} is determined by 0 ⊑1. Let ω : Ω→I be the projection of Ωonto the second factor. Let [−, −] and Eval denote the internal hom and the evaluation of PreOrd(R). Then D is defined on objects (X, ≼X) by D(X, ≼X) = [(X, ≼X)∗, (Ω, ≼Ω)]. The (X, ≼X)-component of the counit ∋is the unique morphism ∋(X,≼X): D(X, ≼X) →(X, ≼X) satisfying ω ◦Eval(X,≼X)∗,(Ω,≼Ω) = ⌞∋(X,≼X)⌟.
Proof. For each monotone map f : (X, ≼X) →(Ω, ≼Ω), we have ω ◦E(f) = p1 ◦f⋄= p1 ◦≽Ω◦f = p1 ◦f, where the last equality follows from Lemma 7.12. Then the statement follows directly from Proposition 7.13 and Theorem 8.3, where we take E = (−)⋄and ω = p1.
We provide some examples of adjunctions obtained via Theorem 8.3 or one of its corollaries. The first example is a direct application of the theorem.
8.8. Example. Let V be a nontrivial commutative quantale. Let R := V -Rel, which is dagger compact (cf. Example 3.21). Furthermore, we take S := Set, which is cartesian closed. Let E : S →R be the functor ‘(−) : Rel →R of Theorem 7.2 restricted to Set. The dagger biproducts of V -Rel are described in Example 2.69, and under the identification
α∈A 1 = A for any set A, it follows that E is the identity on sets, and sends a function f : A →B to the V -relation Ef : A −7→B given by
f(α) = β, otherwise.
Then E has a right adjoint that sends every set X to its V -valued powerset V X. This follows from Theorem 8.3 by taking Ω= V , and by choosing ω : V −7→1 to be the function V × 1 →V , (v, ∗) 7→v. We only need to show that Set(X, V ) →V -Rel(X, 1), f 7→ω • Ef is a bijection. Indeed, for each set X, each function f : X →V , and each x ∈X, we have
v∈V ω(v, ∗) · Ef(x, v) = ω(f(x), ∗) · Ef(x, f(x)) = f(x) · e = f(x).
As a consequence, if f, g : X →V are distinct functions, then f(x) ̸= g(x) for some x ∈X, hence (ω • Ef)(x, ∗) = f(x) ̸= g(x) = (ω • Eg)(x, ∗), showing that ω • Ef ̸= ω • Eg, i.e., f 7→ω • Ef is injective. For surjectivity, let r : X −7→1 be a V -relation, so a function X × 1 →V . Let f : X →V be the function x 7→r(x, ∗). Then for each (x, ∗) ∈X × 1, we have (ω • Ef)(x, ∗) = f(x) = r(x, ∗), so r = ω • Ef, hence we indeed have a bijection.
As the special case V = 2 of the previous example, we obtain the ordinary power set functor. We can also obtain this functor by applying one of corollaries.
8.9. Example. By Theorem 5.21, we can apply Corollary 8.6 to conclude that the embedding E : Set →Rel has a right adjoint P, the covariant power set functor.
In an almost similar way, we can derive the existence of a quantum power set functor.
8.10. Example. Let R = qRel and S = Maps(R) = qSet. The latter category is symmetric monoidal closed [26, Theorem 9.1]. By the properties of qRel stated in Theorem 5.22, we can apply Corollary 8.6 to conclude that the embedding E : qSet →qRel has a right adjoint P, which we call the quantum power set functor.
8.11. Example. If R = Rel, then PreOrd(R) = PreOrd and MonRel(R) = MonRel. It is well known that PreOrd is cartesian closed. The properties of Rel in Theorem 5.21 allow us to apply Corollary 8.7, assuring the existence of a right adjoint D to the functor (−)⋄: PreOrd →MonRel, which is the lower set functor.
8.12. Example. If R = qRel, then PreOrd(R) = qPreOrd and MonRel(R) = qMonRel. In [32, Theorem 8.3], it was shown that the related category qPOS of quantum posets is symmetric monoidal closed. The proof of this theorem can be simplified to obtain a proof of the symmetric monoidal closure of qPreOrd. The properties of qRel stated in Theorem 5.22 allow us to apply Corollary 8.7, assuring that the functor (−)⋄: qPreOrd →qMonRel has a right adjoint D, which we call the quantum lower set functor.
8.13. The reconstruction of internal homsets. In [26], Kornell showed that qSet = Maps(qRel) satisfies properties that strongly resemble the axioms of an elementary topos. Let R be a dagger compact quantaloid and let S = Maps(S). In the previous section, we explored conditions that assure that the embedding S →R has a right adjoint, which relied on the assumption that S is symmetric monoidal closed. In this section, assuming some additional mild conditions, we prove the converse, namely that S is symmetric monoidal closed provided that the embedding S →R has a right adjoint P. We first make the following definition:
8.14. Definition. Let (S, ⊗, I) be a semicartesian category. For any two objects X, Y ∈S, let p1 X⊗Y : X ⊗Y →X and p2 X⊗Y : X ⊗Y →Y be the canonical projections given by X⊗Y := ρX ◦(idX⊗!Y ) and p2 X⊗Y := λY ◦(!X ⊗idY ). Then we call a morphism f : X →Y classical if there is a morphism ˆf : X →X ⊗Y such that f = p2 X⊗Y ◦ˆf and idX = p1 X⊗Y ◦ˆf.
8.15. Lemma. Let (S, ⊗, I) be a semicartesian category. Then a morphism f : X →Y is classical if and only if for each morphism g : X →Z there is a morphism h : X →Z ⊗Y with p1 Z⊗Y ◦h = g and p2 Z⊗Y ◦h = f.
Proof. Assume that for each g : X →Z, there is a morphism h : X →Z ⊗Y with pX ◦h = g. Take, g = idX : X →X yields h : X →X ⊗Y with pX ◦h = idX and pY ◦h = f, so f is classical with ˆf = h. Conversely, assume that f is classical, and let g : X →Z be a morphism. Let h = (g ⊗idY ) ◦ˆf. Then, p1 Z⊗Y ◦h = p1 Z⊗Y ◦(g ⊗idY ) ◦ˆf = ρZ ◦(idZ⊗!Y ) ◦ (g ⊗idY ) ◦ˆf = ρZ ◦(g ⊗idI) ◦(idX⊗!Y ) ◦ˆf = g ◦ρX ◦(idX⊗!Y ) ◦ˆf = g ◦p1 X⊗Y ◦ˆf = g, and Z⊗Y ◦h = p2 Z⊗Y ◦(g⊗idY )◦ˆf = λY ◦(!Z⊗idY )◦(g⊗idY )◦ˆf = λY ◦(!X⊗idY )◦ˆf = p2 X⊗Y ◦ˆf = f.
Let F : X →Y be a map between quantum sets. It was shown in [26, Lemma 10.7 & Proposition 10.8] that there are canonical maps Q : X →‘At(X) and J : ‘qSet(1, Y) →Y such that that F is classical in qSet if and only there is an ordinary function f : At(X) → qSet(1, Y) such that F = J ◦‘f ◦Q. This motivates the terminology ‘classical map’. We will now state the main theorem of this section. For the remainder of this section, we will assume that the conditions in the theorem hold. Note that by Lemma 5.11 S is a monoidal subcategory of R
8.16. Theorem. Let (R, ⊗, I) be a dagger compact quantaloid, and let S = Maps(R). If
(1) S is semicartesian when regarded as a monoidal subcategory of R (cf. Lemma 5.11);
(2) The embedding J : S →R has a right adjoint P with unit {·} and counit ∋;
(3) There exists an object Ωof S and a morphism true : I →Ωsuch that S(X, Ω) → R(X, I), f 7→true† ◦f is a bijection;
(4) S has pullbacks;
(5) For each object X and each subobject m : A →X in S there is a unique classical morphism χA : X →Ωsuch that the diagram below is a pullback square.
Then S is symmetric monoidal closed.
Our proof is essentially the proof that power objects in a topos imply the existence of exponential objects, see for instance Section IV.2 of [36], which we followed quite closely. We first need some lemmas.
8.17. Lemma. Let X ∈S. Then there exists a unique classical morphism σX : P(X) →Ω such that the following diagram is a pullback square:
Proof. This follows directly from the fifth property in the statement of Theorem 8.16.
8.18. Lemma. Let X ∈S. Then there is a unique morphism ¯∋X : P(X) ⊗X∗→Ωsuch that true† ◦¯∋X = ⌞∋X⌟.
Proof. Since R is dagger compact, we can take the coname ⌞∋X⌟: P(X) ⊗X∗→I of ∋X: P(X) →X. Then, by the bijection S(X, Ω) →R(X, I), f 7→true† ◦f there is a unique morphism ¯∋X : P(X) ⊗X∗→Ωin S such that true† ◦¯∋X = ⌞∋X⌟.
8.19. Lemma. Let f : X ⊗Y ∗→Ωbe a morphism in S. Then there exists a unique morphism ˆf : X →P(Y ) in S such that ¯∋Y ◦( ˆf ⊗idY ∗) = f.
Proof. By the third assumption in Theorem 8.16, we have a bijection
S(X ⊗Y ∗, Ω) →R(X ⊗Y ∗, I), f 7→true† ◦f.
By Lemma 2.8, we also have a bijection
R(X, Y ) →R(X ⊗Y ∗, I), g 7→⌞g⌟.
By the second assumption of Theorem 8.16, we have a bijection
S(X, P(Y )) →R(X, Y ), h 7→∋Y ◦h.
So any morphism f : X⊗Y ∗→Ωin S corresponds to a unique morphism true†◦f : X⊗Y ∗→ I in R, for which there is a unique morphism g : X →Y in R such that true† ◦f = ⌞g⌟. By the last bijection, there is a unique ˆf : X →P(Y ) in S such that ∋Y ◦ˆf = g. Hence, ˆf is the unique morphism in S such that true† ◦f = ⌞∋Y ◦ˆf⌟. We have ⌞∋Y ◦ˆf⌟= ϵY ◦((∋Y ◦ˆf)⊗idY ∗= ϵY ◦(∋Y ⊗idY ∗)◦( ˆf ⊗idY ∗) = ⌞∋Y ⌟◦( ˆf ⊗idY ∗) = true† ◦¯∋Y ◦( ˆf ⊗idY ∗), where we used Lemma 8.18 in the last equality. Thus we obtain true† ◦f = true† ◦¯∋Y ◦( ˆf ⊗idY ∗), hence the statement follows from the bijection f 7→true† ◦f.
Proof of Theorem 8.16. Following [36], we assume that the associativity isomorphisms are identities to simplify the notation. Consider objects X and Y of S. In order to construct an object Y X that will be the inner hom of S, we apply Lemma 8.19 to define:
v := \ ¯∋X∗⊗Y , u := \ σY ◦v, k := true◦!I⊗X.
That is, v : P(X∗⊗Y ) →P(Y ), u : P(X∗⊗Y ) →P(X∗), and k : I →P(X∗) are the respective unique morphisms in S such that
¯∋Y ◦(v ⊗idY ∗) = ¯∋X∗⊗Y ; ¯∋X∗◦(u ⊗idX) = σY ◦v; ¯∋X∗◦(k ⊗idX) = true◦!I⊗X.
We now define Y X as the pullback of u and k, so the following diagram is a pullback square:
In order to construct the evaluation map e : Y X ⊗X →Y , we need to prove that
true◦!Y X⊗X = σY ◦v ◦(m ⊗idX). (15)
Consider the following diagram:
Y X ⊗X P(X∗⊗Y ) ⊗X P(Y )
Here, the left square commutes, since it is the definition of Y X tensored with X. The upper middle square commutes by definition of u, the right square commutes by definition of σY and the lower middle diagram commutes by definition of k. Since !I⊗X ◦(!Y X⊗X ⊗idX) =!Y X⊗X, it follows that (15) indeed holds. Thus, we have the following diagram:
and since the square is a pullback square in S, there must be a unique morphism e : Y X⊗X → Y such that the diagram commutes. Next, for another object Z of S and a morphism f : Z ⊗X →Y in S, we claim that there is a unique morphism g : Z →Y X in S such that e ◦(g ⊗idX) = f. To construct g, we first consider the morphism
¯∋Y ◦({·}Y ⊗idY ∗) ◦(f ⊗idY ∗) : Z ⊗X ⊗Y ∗→Ω.
By Lemma 8.19, there is a unique morphism h : Z →P(X∗⊗Y ) in S such that
¯∋Y ◦({·}Y ⊗idY ∗) ◦(f ⊗idY ∗) = ¯∋X∗⊗Y ◦(h ⊗idX ⊗idY ∗).
By definition of v, we obtain
¯∋Y ◦({·}Y ⊗idY ∗) ◦(f ⊗idY ∗) = ¯∋Y ◦(v ⊗idY ∗) ◦(h ⊗idX ⊗idY ∗),
whence, using Lemma 8.19, {·}Y ◦f = v ◦(h ⊗idY ∗). (16)
¯∋X∗◦(k ⊗idX) ◦(!Z ⊗idX) = true◦!I⊗X ◦(!Z ⊗idX) = true◦!Z⊗X = true◦!Y ◦f = σY ◦{·}Y ◦f = σY ◦v ◦(h ⊗idY ∗) = ¯∋X∗◦(u ⊗idX) ◦(h ⊗idX),
where the first equality follows from the definition of k, the fourth equality from the definition of σY , the fifth equality from (16), and the last equality from the definition of u. Lemma 8.19 now yields k◦!Z = u ◦h. Note that automatically we have !Y X ◦g =!Z, so by definition of Y X as the pullback of u and k, it follows that there is a unique morphism g : Z →Y X in S such that the following diagram commutes:
We verify that e ◦(g ⊗idX) = f.
e ◦(g ⊗idX) = (∋Y ) ◦{·}Y ◦e ◦(g ⊗idX) = (∋Y ) ◦v ◦(m ⊗idX) ◦(g ⊗idX) = (∋Y ) ◦v ◦(h ⊗idX) = (∋Y ) ◦{·}Y ◦f = f,
where in the first and last equalities we used the triangle identities of the adjunction J ⊣P, while the second equality follows by definition of e, the third equality follows by definition of g, and the penultimate equality follows from equality (16). Finally, assume that g′ : Z →Y X
is another morphism in S such that e ◦(g′ ⊗idX) = f. Then:
¯∋X∗⊗Y ◦(m ⊗idX ⊗idY ∗) ◦(g ⊗idX ⊗idY ∗) = ¯∋Y ◦v ◦(m ⊗idX ⊗idY ∗) ◦(g ⊗idX ⊗idY ∗) = ¯∋Y ◦({·}Y ⊗idY ∗) ◦(e ⊗idY ∗) ◦(g ⊗idX ⊗idY ∗) = ¯∋Y ◦({·}Y ⊗idY ∗) ◦(f ⊗idY ∗) = ¯∋Y ◦({·}Y ⊗idY ∗) ◦(e ⊗idY ∗) ◦(g′ ⊗idX ⊗idY ∗) = ¯∋Y ◦v ◦(m ⊗idX ⊗idY ∗) ◦(g′ ⊗idX ⊗idY ∗) = ¯∋X∗⊗Y ◦(m ⊗idX ⊗idY ∗) ◦(g′ ⊗idX ⊗idY ∗)
where we used the definition of v in the first and last equalities, and the definition of e in the second and penultimate equalities. Using Lemma 8.19, we obtain m ◦g = m ◦g′. Since we have !Y X ◦g′ =!Z, and by definition g is the unique morphism in S such that m ◦g = h and !Y X ◦g =!Z, it follows that g′ = g.

9. Conclusions and future work
We introduced symmetric monoidal quantaloids as a categorical structure that equips quantaloids with a symmetric monoidal structure, and that generalizes the category Rel. Our prime example is the category qRel of quantum sets and binary relations; our main motivation is the internalization of mathematical structures in this category, which corresponds to the quantization of these structures. We showed that symmetric monoidal quantaloids form a framework in which one can internalize functions and partially ordered structures. For dagger symmetric monoidal quantaloids Q, there are still other connections to be investigated such as limits and subobjects in Maps(Q). It might be that these concepts are best investigated in a 2-dimensional setting by combining Q and Maps(Q) in a double category. Furthermore, we note that that qSet has properties resembling the axioms of topoi [26]. qSet is the noncommutative generalization of the prime example of a topos, namely the category Set of sets and functions. This suggests the existence of notions of quantum allegories and quantum topoi with qRel and qSet as prime examples, respectively. The connection between power objects in Q and the monoidal closure of Maps(Q) in the last section also points towards a notion that generalizes power allegories. We hope that this work eventually contributes to finding these notions and generalizations.
We thank the anonymous reviewer, because their useful comments helped us to improve the final version of this article significantly. We thank Chris Heunen and Andre Kornell for their help with several questions that arose while writing this article. Furthermore, we are indebted to Dominik Lachman, Anna Jenˇcov´a, Peter Sarkoci and Miloslav ˇStˇep´an, who provided us with ample comments. We also thank Isar Stubbe for various discussions that had a profound impact on this work. Gejza Jenˇca is supported by VEGA-2/0128/24, VEGA-1/0036/23 and APVV-20-0069. Bert Lindenhovius was partly supported by VEGA 2/0128/24 and APVV-22-0570, and is currently supported by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF) [Project Number: PAT6443523, DOI: 10.55776/PAT6443523].

CITYSEEKER: HOW DO VLMS EXPLORE EMBODIED URBAN NAVIGATION WITH IMPLICIT HUMAN NEEDS?
Siqi Wang1,2, Chao Liang3, Yunfan Gao2, Erxin Yu1, Sen Li1, Yushi Li1, Jing Li1,4∗, Haofen Wang2∗
1Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China 2Tongji University, Shanghai, China 3Nanjing Institute of Geography and Limnology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Nanjing, China 4Research Centre for Data Science & Artificial Intelligence, Hong Kong, China {siqi23.wang, erxin.yu, 17903230r}@connect.polyu.hk liangchao@niglas.ac.cn, 2311821@tongji.edu.cn, slien@connect.ust.hk jing-amelia.li@polyu.edu.hk, carter.whfcarter@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have made significant progress in explicit instruction-based navigation; however, their ability to interpret implicit human needs (e.g., “I am thirsty”) in dynamic urban environments remains underexplored. This paper introduces CitySeeker, a novel benchmark designed to assess VLMs’ spatial reasoning and decision-making capabilities for exploring embodied urban navigation to address implicit needs. CitySeeker includes 6,440 trajectories across 8 cities, capturing diverse visual characteristics and implicit needs in 7 goal-driven scenarios. Extensive experiments reveal that even top-performing models (e.g., Qwen2.5-VL-32B-Instruct) achieve only 21.1% task completion. We find key bottlenecks in error accumulation in long-horizon reasoning, inadequate spatial cognition, and deficient experiential recall. To further analyze them, we investigate a series of exploratory strategies—Backtracking Mechanisms, Enriching Spatial Cognition, and Memory-Based Retrieval (BCR), inspired by human cognitive mapping’s emphasis on iterative observation-reasoning cycles and adaptive path optimization. Our analysis provides actionable insights for developing VLMs with robust spatial intelligence required for tackling “last-mile” navigation challenges.

INTRODUCTION
arXiv:2512.16755v1 [cs.AI] 18 Dec 2025
∗*Corresponding authors
a cornerstone for realizing a new generation of intelligent services, leading to a rising demand for VLMs that can guide service robots, drones, or an AR assistant through urban settings. However, the capabilities of VLMs in this domain remain underexplored, as recent advances have focused on agents that follow explicit step-by-step instructions (e.g., “Proceed straight until the sculpture fountain, turn right, then continue until reaching McDonald’s”). Such approaches, which we describe as explicit needs, rely on pre-constructed navigation directives rather than natural human commands, and face critical limitations in dynamic or novel urban scenarios (Wang et al., 2021; 2024b).
Dataset Instruction Type Instruction Environment Source City Nodes Avg.Length Avg.Token
Talk the Walk (De Vries et al., 2018) Explicit 786 GridWorld 3D Rendering 100 6.8 34.5 Room-to-Room (Anderson et al., 2018) Explicit 21,567 Indoor Panoramas 10,800 6.0 29.0 Touchdown (Chen et al., 2019) Explicit 9,326 Outdoor Street View 29,641 35.2 89.6 Talk2Nav (Vasudevan et al., 2021) Explicit 10,714 Outdoor Panoramas and Map 21,233 40.0 68.8 StreetNav (Jain et al., 2024) Explicit 644,415 Outdoor Street View 1,194m 7.13 map2seq (Schumann & Riezler, 2020) Explicit 7,672 Outdoor OpenStreetMap 29,641 40.0 55.1 CitySeeker Implicit 6,440 Outdoor+Dynamic Street View and Map 41,128 18.3 11.11
In contrast, real-world human instructions often involve abstract goals that pertain to implicit needs (Zhou et al., 2024b). These needs are often unannotated on traditional maps or lack the granularity needed for last-mile navigation, and are implicit on multiple aspects: functional (e.g., when finding a restroom, recognizing the affordance that one is also available in a McDonald’s, or inferring that “I’m thirsty” can be resolved by a convenience store or even a public water fountain), spatial (e.g., upon seeing a more visually prominent landmark like a shopping complex, inferring that a Starbucks is likely nearby, or realizing that a cinema is often hidden inside a mall), and semantic (e.g., subjective qualities like a “romantic” or “upscale” restaurant). Addressing these common needs is a fundamental challenge for goal-oriented navigation, requiring an agent to ground environmental intent through active exploration and spatial reasoning to solve the crucial “last-mile” problem, especially in contexts like city walks (Gao et al., 2024). We illustrate this concept in Figure 1.
The ability to understand human needs in urban space is fundamental to Embodied Urban Navigation (Liu et al., 2024; Hirose et al., 2023). While prior work has explored VLM’s ability to interpret human needs, these efforts have been largely confined to constrained settings like indoor environments and 3D games (Wu et al., 2024a; Hu et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2024b). This raises a critical scientific question: Can VLMs develop intrinsic spatial awareness (Yang et al., 2024) for Embodied Navigation in open-world urban settings to address implicit human needs? This task introduces unique challenges: (1) Dynamic Visual Complexity, with diverse and changing road networks and storefronts; (2) Free-Form Instruction Parsing for goals in flexible language; and (3) Long-Horizon Reasoning across extensive distances. The latter is not merely about path length but requires robust, multi-hop reasoning that couples semantic inference with visual grounding. For instance, to address “I need a temporary place with Wi-Fi to work,” an agent must ground the abstract function of “working.” While it may infer POI categories like Cafe or Library, the final decision depends on visually grounding a location’s suitability by dynamically searching for real-world cues—such as a storefront’s ambiance, patrons with laptops, or even a “Free Wi-Fi” sign—that confirm it meets the user’s need in real time.
Humans address these challenges using cognitive maps—mental representations of spatial relationships and environmental attributes (Epstein et al., 2017; Tolman, 1948). By combining observation with prior knowledge, humans can dynamically update their spatial understanding, infer latent properties, and formulate grounded plans from abstract goals—capabilities yet to be replicated in VLMs for outdoor navigation (Clemenson et al., 2021; Farzanfar et al., 2023; Momennejad et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024b). Inspired by this, we propose CitySeeker, a novel benchmark for autonomous embodied urban navigation. It assesses Implicit-Need-Driven Visual Grounding: the process of translating an implicit need into a concrete visual search by using semantic inference to infer possible targets and grounding this understanding in a continuous stream of observations. To systematically probe this ability, its 7 task categories represent a spectrum of varying cognitive difficulty, from direct recognition (“Basic POI”) to highly abstract reasoning (“Abstract Demand,” “Semantic Preference”). The benchmark is implemented through 6,440 trajectories across 8 globally distributed urban regions with diverse layouts and visual characteristics (Table 1).
Our extensive experiments reveal that existing VLMs generally underperform, exhibiting significant trajectory deviation and deficient spatial cognition. Building on these benchmark findings, we further investigate advanced strategies that endow the agent with human-like cognitive capabilities. We propose and analyze a triad of exploratory approaches: Backtracking mechanisms mimic selfcorrection Spatial Cognition Enrichment mimics mental map building and Memory-Based Retrieval
mirrors recalling past experiences. These BCR strategies offer a concrete roadmap to elevate VLM spatial intelligence. From a cognitive science perspective, our research is aligned with exciting developments in AI concerning Spatial Mental Models within LLMs (Momennejad et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024b), probing the intrinsic spatial intelligence of these models. In summary, our contributions are threefold:
• CitySeeker is the first large-scale benchmark for embodied urban navigation that addresses implicit needs across diverse multi-city settings, incorporating real-world visual diversity, long-horizon planning, and unstructured instructions.
• We design a VLM-based framework and a suite of human-inspired cognitive strategies (BCR) that translate implicit needs into multi-step plans through iterative observation-reasoning cycles.
• Through extensive experiments, we surface key bottlenecks in VLM spatial reasoning and crystallize them—and their fixes—into the BCR triad of Backtracking, Cognitive-map enrichment, and Retrieval-augmented memory, offering insightful guidance for advancing spatial intelligence.

RELATED WORK
Spatial Cognition and Mental Models. The concept of spatial cognition—internal mental representations of space—originates from cognitive science and has long been considered fundamental to how humans navigate (Tolman, 1948; Epstein et al., 2017). A recent paradigm shift has been spurred by findings that large models can develop emergent “world models” and representations of space and time without supervised training (Gurnee & Tegmark, 2023). This has inspired a new line of inquiry dedicated to probing the intrinsic spatial intelligence of these models (Yang et al., 2025; Yin et al., 2025; Feng et al., 2025; Manh et al., 2025). Our work provides the first attempt to systematically evaluate the emergent spatial cognition of VLMs through complex urban navigation tasks.
Vision-Language Navigation (VLN). Research in VLN has explored diverse instruction formats, including step-by-step, dialog-based (Goetting et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024a), and goal- or intentionoriented instructions (Wang et al., 2023; Qi et al., 2020a; Chiang et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2025). However, the majority of outdoor VLN research and benchmarks, such as Touchdown (Chen et al., 2019), have focused on agents following explicit step-by-step directives. This has led to the development of various methods (Xu et al., 2024; Schumann et al., 2024; Dorbala et al., 2022; Pan et al., 2024) —excel at direct text-visual matching but are less equipped for the abstract reasoning required by implicit goals. Moreover, many solutions are limited by a reliance on static representations of predefined environment and poor generalizability (Cao et al., 2024; Elnoor et al., 2024; Zhan et al., 2024), revealing a gap in handling dynamic, real-world urban navigation. Goal-oriented navigation requires agents to use perception and commonsense reasoning to ground abstract concepts. Its form focuses on zero-shot open-world navigation (Mirowski et al., 2018; Majumdar et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2024b), which has largely been limited to indoor environments. CitySeeker is the first benchmark to evaluate this goal-oriented reasoning for implicit needs in open-world cities.

CITYSEEKER BENCHMARK
The CitySeeker dataset comprises 6,440 route instances and corresponding natural language instructions covering 7 carefully curated categories of everyday human needs. These categories span typical requests from target recognition (e.g., finding nearby facilities or brands), contextual inference (e.g., inferring that a restroom is likely available in McDonald’s) and attribute analysis (e.g., guiding to a bank with accessible facilities), to abstract and subjective reasoning (e.g., finding a restaurant suitable for a team gathering). The design of these categories is guided by three core criteria: (1) semantic complexity of goals, (2) spatial reasoning requirements, and (3) real-world applicability.
CitySeeker is collected from eight distinct metropolitan areas—Beijing, Shanghai, Shenzhen, Chengdu, Hong Kong, London, and New York—capturing diverse architectural layouts and dynamic street-level visuals. Overall, the benchmark includes over 41,128 street-view panoramas (from Google or Baidu Maps since 2024) to ensure realistic appearance variations. As shown in Figure 2, our dataset balances instruction types, urban regions, and navigation difficulty (based on trajectory length). These categories collectively capture a broad range and diversity of real-world navigation challenges with 19 2% involving POI navigation 20 4% requiring the interpretation of abstract
demands, and other major portions dedicated to brand-specific searches (23.4%) and latent POI discovery (23.0%). To facilitate quantitative evaluation, we further sampled 1,257 route instances as the final benchmark test set, balancing coverage across all metropolitan areas and categories.

3.1 BENCHMARK CONSTRUCTION
We employ a demand-driven pipeline to generate high-quality navigation routes at scale, as summarized in Figure 3. By integrating panoramic data, POI filtering, and graph-based distance queries, it yields high-fidelity routes spanning a broad spectrum of real-life urban navigation needs (see Appendix B for details).
Data Collection and Topology Construction. We gather street-level panoramas from both Google and Baidu Street View, covering diverse urban areas (e.g., Western cities, Hong Kong, Mainland China). To discretize each city’s road network, we place a node every 20 meters and capture its panoramic imagery with metadata (e.g., latitude/longitude, heading, navigable headings). These nodes and edges represent navigable connections annotated with azimuths and distances, forming a graph-based structure stored in Neo4j. This layout facilitates spatial queries and ensures consistent global connectivity. Each collected Points of Interest (POI) is then linked to any vantage node within a 50-meter radius, reflecting the idea of a visible or discoverable place from that viewpoint. This step updates the knowledge graph with triplets of the form (Node) –has–> (VisiblePOI).
Question Design and Generation. To cover common daily needs, we first identify a set of highfrequency POI categories. These are sourced primarily from map providers (e.g., “restaurant,” “coffee shop”) and are supplemented with other visually rich POIs identified from street-view images and manually verified, capturing targets often unannotated on maps. This enables us to design specific templates for different query types. Each question type is manually associated with one or more POI categories; for instance, “I’m feeling thirsty” may map to beverage shops, water fountains, or cafés.
Route Generation and Validation. We generate navigation paths by selecting start and end nodes based on the intended POI category. We determine the starting nodes based on constraints to ensure that the shortest path falls within a controllable minimum radius (e.g., ensuring no other similar POIs lie within an overly small radius), thereby guaranteeing a meaningful navigation distance. The shortest paths between start and target nodes (containing the target POI) are then calculated using a shortest-path algorithm (e.g., A*). This process yields effective routes ranging from 5 to 25 steps. Finally, we manually verify each route by confirming the target POI is indeed visible or indirectly visible at the terminal node. To further empirically validate the rationality of our Need-to-POI mappings and mitigate potential designer bias, we conducted a cross-cultural human consensus survey (N = 120), which demonstrated a high degree of agreement (83.39%) with our ground truth categories (see Appendix B for details) Any route failing this check is refined or discarded

EVALUATION ON CITYSEEKER

4.1 OVERVIEW
Task Formulation. We formulate the VLN task within a navigation graph G = (V, E), where V represents the set of georeferenced nodes and E denotes edges. At time step t, the agent occupies a node vt ∈V. The agent receives a natural language instruction W and an observation set Ot = {ot,1, ot,2, . . . , ot,n}, where n is the number of perspective views at vt. The agent maintains a state st = (vt, Ot) representing current environmental context. The agent operates via a policy πΘ that sequentially generates a reasoning rationale followed by an action: (Φt, at, ct) = πΘ(W, st). Here, Φt is the reasoning rationale, and at ∈At = {1, . . . , n} is the index of the selected perspective view with confidence ct ∈[0, 1]. The environment transitions to the next node vt+1 based on the dynamics T(vt, at). A reasoning process is recorded as: τ = {W, (s1, Φ1, a1, c1), . . . , (sT , ΦT , aT , cT )}, where the process terminates once the stop condition is met.
Navigation Framework. Figure 4 illustrates the navigation pipeline. At each time step, the panoramic image at the current viewpoint is subdivided into multiple perspective views, each corresponding to a feasible heading. Guided by a ReAct-style reasoning procedure (Yao et al., 2023), the VLM processes the current observation (Observe), infers a navigation intention (Think), selects one perspective view to move toward (Act), and finally outputs a confidence score as reflection (Reflect). This process iterates until the agent deems it has reached the goal or surpasses a maximum step limit (35 steps). To isolate the model’s core spatial reasoning ability, we intentionally keep each step independent: the agent does not maintain persistent memory or feed previous internal states into subsequent decisions.

4.2 EVALUATION SETUP
Benchmark Models. We comprehensively evaluate 27 multi-image capable VLMs across diverse model families, encompassing various parameter scales and architecture. For proprietary models, we consider GPT-4o, GPT-4o-Mini, o4-mini, Gemini-1.5-Pro and Gemini-2.5-Pro (Team, 2024). For open-source models, we evaluate models from Qwen2-VL series (7/72B Instruct) (Wang et al., 2024a), Qwen2.5-VL series (7/32/72B Instruct) (Bai et al., 2025), InternVL2.5 (8/26/38B) (Chen et al., 2024), InternVL3 (8/14/38B), Llama-3.2 (11/90B Vision variants) (Dubey et al., 2024), Llama-4 (Scout-17B-16E-Instruct/Maverick-17B-128E-Instruct), LLaVA derivatives (Llama3-llava-next-8b, LLaVA-OneVision-Qwen2-7B) (Liu et al., 2023), MiniCPM derivatives (V-2.6/o-2.6) (Yao et al., 2024; Yu et al., 2024), Phi series (3.5-Vision-Instruct/4-Multimodal-Instruct) (Abdin et al., 2024; Microsoft, 2025) and MiniMax-01 (Li et al., 2025). All evaluations are conducted under zero-shot settings using unified prompts (see Appendix C.1 for full details).
Metric Design. We adopt a comprehensive evaluation protocol that extends standard VLN metrics (Qi et al., 2020b) to assess task success and navigation efficiency. Our evaluation includes: Task Completion (TC), measured with metrics of varying granularity: (1) TC-Exact (TCE) requires a strict, single-node endpoint match. To account for the fact that a target is often visible from multiple nearby viewpoints (2) TC-Proximity (TCP) grants success within a geodesic threshold of ≤50m to address
Models Overall Subcategories
TCE TCP TCC SPL SPD nDTW
GPT-4o 2.4 18.3 6.8 13.3 125.4 136.9 18.9 21.1 19.6 9.7 18.9 14.9 26.0
GPT-4o-mini 1.1 12.3 7.6 7.5 202.0 325.2 12.3 21.1 14.3 7.4 11.8 7.5 10.6
o4-mini 2.6 17.9 6.8 11.6 130.1 156.3 20.2 19.9 12.5 13.1 16.7 9.0 24.0 Gemini-2.5-pro 1.8 17.3 5.0 12.1 121.8 121.2 20.4 18.0 16.1 10.2 20.6 9.0 13.5
InternVL2.5-8B 1.0 14.6 4.4 5.6 118.5 140.4 15.7 14.3 1.8 14.8 18.4 10.4 10.6 InternVL2.5-26B 1.6 15.3 3.7 7.3 109.5 106.0 20.4 12.4 8.9 10.8 17.1 7.5 8.7 InternVL2.5-38B 2.2 18.1 7.2 11.2 136.6 169.2 17.6 24.2 14.3 13.1 22.8 10.4 16.4 InternVL3-8B 1.3 15.8 4.9 6.4 118.3 144.5 17.2 15.5 7.1 14.2 16.7 16.4 15.4 InternVL3-14B 1.7 15.1 6.4 8.5 136.2 170.8 13.8 20.5 17.9 8.0 19.3 10.5 17.3 InternVL3-38B 2.5 19.3 6.7 10.6 115.8 128.3 18.9 25.5 12.5 13.1 23.3 11.9 21.2 Qwen2-VL-7B 0.7 11.1 1.7 5.2 111.4 114.4 11.4 9.9 14.3 4.6 13.2 13.4 15.4 Qwen2-VL-72B 1.0 11.9 2.3 9.0 113.0 89.5 14.8 8.7 7.1 7.4 14.5 1.5 15.4 Qwen2.5-VL-7B 0.5 15.8 4.3 4.6 119.0 151.8 20.2 17.4 12.5 10.2 13.6 7.5 15.4 Qwen2.5-VL-32B 2.6 21.1 6.2 12.7 122.6 147.0 22.2 30.4 10.7 14.2 24.1 9.0 20.2 Qwen2.5-VL-72B 2.0 14.6 7.2 9.1 174.9 250.2 14.8 21.7 14.3 6.8 15.8 11.9 14.4 Llama3.2-90B 0.9 12.5 3.7 7.3 124.5 123.1 13.6 12.4 1.8 9.7 14.0 10.4 16.4 Llama-4-Scout-17B 1.8 14.1 7.0 6.7 145.0 211.4 12.3 18.6 14.3 8.5 17.5 17.9 14.4 Llama-4-Maverick-17B 0.9 10.8 1.6 4.0 107.1 110.5 12.7 10.6 8.9 10.2 12.7 4.5 4.8 MiniMax-01 1.5 13.6 6.8 8.8 172.2 236.6 15.5 16.2 8.9 6.8 14.9 11.9 13.5 MiniCPM-V-2.6 0.9 11.7 3.5 4.0 122.2 152.2 12.5 10.6 19.6 9.7 13.2 7.5 8.7 MiniCPM-o-2.6 1.4 15.5 6.4 5.6 130.1 176.0 14.4 22.4 10.7 12.5 18.9 11.9 12.5 Phi-4-Multimodal 0.6 9.2 1.1 7.1 101.1 58.1 14.0 6.2 5.4 2.8 10.5 7.5 2.9 Llava-Llama3-8B 0.3 10.4 0.8 5.1 104.8 86.9 14.8 8.7 5.4 8.0 8.8 4.5 7.7 Llava-Qwen2-7B 0.3 6.9 0.4 6.2 98.1 49.8 12.5 2.5 3.6 2.8 6.6 3.0 1.0
Human 5.7 30.1 13.5 21.2 143.5 178.6 31.8 36.5 34.9 19.7 31.5 16.7 29.8 Random Choice 0.7 13.9 3.2 3.8 112.4 128.3 16.6 10.6 5.4 10.8 14.9 16.4 13.5 Forward Direction 0.2 7.2 0.4 1.8 100.8 99.3 13.3 3.1 3.6 2.3 6.6 1.5 1.9
this spatial ambiguity; (3) TC-Category (TCC) evaluates whether the final destination belongs to the same category as the intended target, acknowledging practical flexibility in location-based tasks (e.g., reaching any restaurant rather than the closest one); Path Quality, assessed via (4) Normalized Dynamic Time Warping (nDTW) (Xu et al., 2024) to quantify trajectory alignment with ground truth, (5) Success weighted by Path Length (SPL) to rigorously measure navigation efficiency by balancing success rates against trajectory length, and (6) Average Steps (AS) for decision efficiency; Distance-Based Metrics, (7) Shortest-Path Distance (SPD) for straight-line distance to the goal.
Reference Baselines. To comprehensively assess model capabilities, we introduce three evaluation baselines. We establish a (1) Human Baseline using an interactive platform where 10 participants of diverse backgrounds performed the navigation tasks. We also include a (2) Random Choice Baseline, which selects a random direction at each step, and a (3) Forward Direction Baseline, which always chooses the forward direction as a simple heuristic.

MAIN RESULTS AND ANALYSIS

5.1 OVERALL PERFORMANCE
fusing map-based information with visual grounding (see Appendix D). Human participants achieved the best overall performance, outperforming all models on both TCP and TCC. They exhibit a clear advantage across diverse task dimensions, especially in tasks requiring urban commonsense like “Transit Hub” navigation (a TCP of 34.9% for humans versus 10.7% for the best VLM Qwen2.5-VL32B) and “Basic POI” finding (31.8% vs. 22.2%).
Task Category Analysis. Breaking down performance by query category reveals a clear divide between tasks requiring direct recognition versus those demanding deeper inference, as shown in Table 2 and radar chart of Figure 5. Models performed best on Brand-Specific navigation, where recognizable brand names (e.g., Starbucks) serve as strong lexical and visual anchors. In sharp contrast, one of the most challenging categories was Latent POI, which requires agents to reason about indirectly observable targets that are not explicitly signed (e.g., inferring a restroom is inside a McDonald’s). This finding highlights a key VLM limitation: while adept at direct recognition, they falter when tasks require nuanced, commonsense inference about the environment.
Variation Across Cities. Performance also varies across different metropolitan areas. As shown on bar chart of Figure 5, interestingly, GPT-4o variants perform poorly in Beijing but achieve highest scores in New York—this may reflect biases in the training data or the more grid-like street layouts in the United States. To test for linguistic bias, we conducted a cross-lingual experiment, which revealed that this performance gap is not primarily driven by language factors (see Appendix C.4 for details).

5.2 IN-DEPTH ANALYSIS
As shown in Figure 6, model performance tends to degrade with increased route length. When the number of steps is fewer than 20, nDTW values remain relatively small and correct trajectories are more common. However, at around 35 steps, nDTW metrics become highly scattered, indicating that longer horizons require robust sequential reasoning—an ability current VLMs often lack, as their errors accumulate without being integrated into a coherent spatial memory
Empirical Performance. As shown in Table 3, B1 generally improves TCP across models, indicating that confidence-based backtracking stabilizes navigation for capable VLMs. However, it underperforms on smaller models like MiniCPM-V-2.6 (TCP drops from 11.3% to 9.1%), suggesting insufficient spatial reasoning for effective self-assessment. B2 and B3 are more universally effective, consistently improving TCP across all models. For instance, B3 boosts GPT-4o-Mini’s TCP to 18.2% while significantly improving its path efficiency (nDTW drops from 337.1 to 258.3). These results highlight that while simple self-correction benefits capable models, external signals (like progress rewards or timely hints, in B2 and B3) offer more robust improvements.

6.2 SPATIAL COGNITION ENRICHMENT
To improve the agent’s environmental awareness, we generate enriched spatial cues by using GPT-4.1 to synthesize successful and erroneous trajectories from various VLMs (e.g., GPT-4o, Gemini-2.5pro). This synthesized knowledge is then injected into the agent’s prompt in one of two formats. (C1) Topology Cognitive Graph provides a structured graph where nodes represent locations and edges represent actionable transitions. This format forces the agent to ground its decisions in explicit environmental connectivity, discouraging exploration of invalid paths. (C2) Relative Position Map offers a more intuitive spatial context, describing relationships between locations with directional cues (e.g., “left”, “slightly right”) and estimated distances. While lacking explicit connectivity, this method allows the agent to construct a flexible mental map based on relative positional relationships.
Empirical Performance. Table 3 illustrates that C1 improves TCP across models by grounding decisions in topological structure. For instance, GPT-4o-Mini achieves an increase from 12.5% to 17.2%. The impact of C2 is more mixed; while it can improve path efficiency (e.g., for GPT-4o-Mini, nDTW drops to 239.7), it sometimes slightly reduces task completion (e.g., for MiniCPM-V-2.6, TCP drops from 11.3% to 8.5%). Overall, C1 appears more reliable for improving task success, whereas C2 supports a more flexible and exploratory approach but sacrifices some success rate.

6.3 MEMORY-BASED RETRIEVAL
To overcome fragmented decision-making, we implement a graph-based memory module, enabling agents to retrieve or append past rationales and actions. (R1) Topology-based Retrieval aggregates multi-round node and edge metadata based on graph connectivity. At each step, it retrieves a local subgraph of h-hop neighbors, accessing metadata like node visitation counts, previous decisions, edge transition success rates and confidence scores. This helps avoid repeating past mistakes and promotes the reuse of successful paths. (R2) Spatial-based Retrieval complements this by retrieving a subgraph of nodes and relationships within a fixed Euclidean radius, which emphasizes geographic proximity. (R3) Historical Trajectory Lookup introduces short-term memory by appending recent intra-round navigation history into VLM’s context. This includes spatial data, action choices, and prior decision rationale over a sliding window. Unlike R1 and R2, R3 does not rely on database traversal, making it a lightweight method to stabilize reasoning within a single episode.
Empirical Performance. Table 3 reveals that the R-series strategies are the most powerful overall. For GPT-4o-Mini, R3 yields the highest TCP of all strategies (19.4%), while R1 achieves the best path efficiency with a dramatic nDTW reduction to 136.6. This demonstrates that different memory-based approaches can simultaneously enhance both task completion and navigation efficiency. Across all models, R-series strategies consistently produce some of the highest TCP scores, with R1 pushing the top-performing Qwen2.5-VL-32B-Instruct to an impressive 26.9% TCP. This confirms that memory-aware navigation is crucial for improving both the reliability and effectiveness of the agent.
Trade-off Analysis and Application Scenarios. The B-Series strategies (especially B2 and B3) reliably improve task completion, making them suitable when success is prioritized. The C-Series is applicable when external spatial information can be provided; C1 generally favors accuracy, while C2 may trade success for better path efficiency. Overall, the R-Series is the most robust approach for long-horizon navigation, consistently yielding the best task completion rates. Lightweight models like InternVL3-8B are suitable for time-sensitive tasks, while heavier models like Qwen2.5-VL-32BInstruct augmented with R-series strategies are ideal for precision-critical applications

CONCLUSION
CitySeeker establishes a new standard for embodied urban navigation by systematically evaluating how well VLMs tackle implicit human needs in diverse, real-world cityscapes. Our extensive experiments uncover that today’s models frequently struggle with the complexities of this task, often deviating from optimal routes due to limited spatial reasoning. To address this, we introduced a human-inspired cognitive framework and outlined three insightful strategies—backtracking, spatial cognition enrichment, and memory-based retrieval—which demonstrably improve performance. These findings offer a clear pathway toward developing more robust, human-like agents capable of solving the crucial “last-mile” problem in real-world navigation.

ETHICS STATEMENT
The study involved human participants for the establishment of a human baseline. All participants were fairly compensated for their time in line with our institution’s standard rates for research assistance, and the experimental procedure was clearly explained to them. The street-view imagery used in our experiments was accessed via publicly available APIs (Google Maps and Baidu Maps). To strictly adhere to the API Terms of Service, we do not distribute any raw street-view images or offline copies. Instead, researchers can access the visual data using our provided scripts, which query the official APIs using the released trajectory metadata (e.g., Panorama IDs and coordinates). This approach ensures full compliance while maintaining the scientific reproducibility of the benchmark.

REPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
To ensure the reproducibility of our work while complying with data usage policies, we have made our metadata, code, and supplementary materials publicly available. The CitySeeker benchmark release includes: (1) the complete trajectory graph data (nodes, edges, and Panorama IDs), and (2) the full implementation code for our evaluation framework and BCR exploratory strategies. The scripts enable re-fetching the necessary street-view imagery directly from the public APIs. This methodology aligns with established practices in the field (e.g., Touchdown (Chen et al., 2019)) to ensure reproducibility without distributing copyrighted images. Furthermore, we have verified that reproducing test set via these scripts incurs no financial cost under standard API usage tiers. All resources can be found at anonymous repository linked in Appendix A. The main paper and appendix provide comprehensive details on our experimental setup (Appendix C), the exact prompts used for all VLM evaluations (Appendix C.2), and the specifics of our evaluation metrics (Section 4.2).

Learning Confidence Ellipsoids and Applications to Robust Subspace Recovery
Chao Gao∗, Liren Shan†, Vaidehi Srinivas‡, Aravindan Vijayaraghavan§
We study the problem of finding confidence ellipsoids for an arbitrary distribution in high dimensions. Given samples from a distribution D and a confidence parameter α, the goal is to find the smallest volume ellipsoid E which has probability mass PD[E] ≥1 −α. Ellipsoids are a highly expressive class of confidence sets as they can capture correlations in the distribution, and can approximate any convex set. This problem has been studied in many different communities. In statistics, this is the classic minimum volume estimator introduced by Rousseeuw as a robust non-parametric estimator of location and scatter. However in high dimensions, it becomes NPhard to obtain any non-trivial approximation factor in volume when the condition number β of the ellipsoid (ratio of the largest to the smallest axis length) goes to ∞. This motivates the focus of our paper: can we efficiently find confidence ellipsoids with volume approximation guarantees when compared to ellipsoids of bounded condition number β? Our main result is a polynomial time algorithm that finds an ellipsoid E whose volume is within a O(βγd) multiplicative factor of the volume of best β-conditioned ellipsoid while covering at least 1 −O(α/γ) probability mass for any γ < α. We complement this with a computational hardness result that shows that such a dependence seems necessary up to constants in the exponent. The algorithm and analysis uses the rich primal-dual structure of the minimum volume enclosing ellipsoid and the geometric Brascamp-Lieb inequality. This natural iterative algorithm also gives a new subroutine for robust estimation problems. As a consequence, we obtain the first polynomial time algorithm with approximation guarantees on worst-case instances of the robust subspace recovery problem.
arXiv:2512.16875v1 [cs.DS] 18 Dec 2025
∗Department of Statistics, University of Chicago, Chicago, USA, chaogao@uchicago.edu †Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago, Chicago, USA, lirenshan@ttic.edu ‡Department of Computer Science, Northwestern University, Evanston, USA, vaidehi@u.northwestern.edu §Department of Computer Science, Northwestern University, Evanston, USA, aravindv@northwestern.edu
Algorithm for Subspace Recovery
Computational Intractability and Unavoidability of Γ = βΩ(α) Dependence
A Computational Hardness of Obtaining Non-trivial Volume Approximation Guarantees
B Proofs in Section 4
Finding small confidence sets is a basic and ubiquitous task in statistics and data analysis. Given independent samples drawn from the distribution D over Rd and a confidence parameter α ∈(0, 1), the goal is to find the set S in a natural class C of confidence sets that minimizes volume while achieving the desired coverage of 1 −α:
min vol(S) s.t. S ∈C, PD[S] ≥1 −α. (1)
Here vol(S) denotes the volume or Lebesgue measure of the set S. This is a central and well-studied problem in statistics, with applications to estimating density level sets, support estimation, uncertainty quantification, robust estimation and conformal prediction [EM92, Pol97, Rou85, Pol99, GKCW03, SN05, GSSV25b]. When the VC dimension of the class C is bounded, this task becomes statistically tractable by solving the empirical version of the problem on a finite number of samples [Pol99, SN05]. This problem has been studied for several natural classes including balls, ellipsoids, rectangles or products of intervals, and even some more general non-convex sets, but it becomes algorithmically challenging in high dimensions. Among natural classes of confidence sets, ellipsoids occupy a privileged position. Confidence ellipsoids are a highly expressive family of confidence sets, as they naturally adapt to correlations among high-dimensional outputs and highlight directions of high or low uncertainty. They have been successfully applied in practical settings with structured outputs — for instance, in timeseries forecasting, where prediction errors across timesteps are highly correlated [MDR22, XJX24]. Moreover, confidence ellipsoids are universal approximators of all convex confidence sets due to the famous John’s theorem [Joh48]. Recall that an ellipsoid E is parameterized by a center c ∈Rd and a positive definite matrix M and given by E = {x : ∥M−1/2(x −c)∥2 ≤1}. The family of ellipsoids in Rd has VC dimension  d+1 + d. Given any arbitrary distribution D, we can draw n = O(d2) i.i.d. samples from D, and solve the following empirical version of the problem. For n arbitrary points a1, a2, . . . , an ∈Rd, find
argmin E∈E vol(E) s.t. E ∩{a1, . . . , an} ≥(1 −α)n, (2)
where E is the family of ellipsoids in d dimensions. Any ellipsoid E that contains at least (1−α)n of
the points also achieves a coverage of 1−α−O(
n ) on D, via uniform convergence for set families of bounded VC dimension. While there is a distributional flavor to the population version of the problem in (1) (with C = E), the distributional and empirical problems are actually equivalent. Given any arbitrary set of n points a1, . . . , an ∈Rd, one can just consider D to be the uniform probability distribution on these n points. This emphasizes the worst-case nature of the problem, as the distribution D is arbitrary. This is also crucial in many applications where the method is used to estimate uncertainty of an (unknown) arbitrary distribution. Problem (2) has been an important object of study in several different communities. In statistics, this is the famous minimum volume estimator (MVE) of Rousseeuw [Rou85], that is studied as a robust non-parametric estimator for location and scatter parameters of a distribution. It is preferred for several desirable properties including affine equivariance (they behave well under affine transformations of the data), and having the maximum breakdown value1 among all robust estimators of scatter and location (see the excellent survey by [VAR09] for details). Solving this problem exactly is known to be NP-hard [Ber06, AML14]. This is also been studied as the robust
1The breakdown value is the fraction of outliers the estimator can tolerate while providing a meaningful estimate.
minimum volume ellipsoid, minimum volume ellipsoid with outliers, and minimum k-enclosing ellipsoid problem in optimization, applied mathematics and computational statistics, where many heuristics have been developed. These methods have been used as subroutines for applications in control theory, dynamical systems, and uncertainty quantification [Can96, AML14, Ahi14, CG04, VLSD24, HMG25]. However, despite several decades of work, to the best of our knowledge, there is no known polynomial time algorithm for learning small confidence ellipsoids.
Question: Can we design polynomial time algorithms that learn confidence ellipsoids with rigorous volume guarantees?
When α = 0, this is the classic minimum volume enclosing ellipsoid problem (MVEE) which can be solved in polynomial time using semi-definite programming [BV04, Tod16]. This is also the famous L¨owner-John ellipsoid for the convex hull of the given points [Joh48]. Very recent work of [GSSV25a] studied the special case of (2) for Euclidean balls, which is already known to be NP-hard. They give polynomial time algorithms that achieve volume guarantees that are competitive with that of the optimal solution up to a multiplicative factor, while relaxing the confidence parameter α by a small amount. The algorithmic problem (2) is significantly more challenging compared to balls. A special case is robust subspace recovery which is the computationally hard problem of finding a subspace of dimension at most a prescribed (1 −γ)d that contains an 1 −α fraction of points [HM13]. The NP-hardness of the robust subspace recovery problem directly implies that it is NP-hard to get any non-trivial volume approximation for (2) i.e., distinguish when the minimum volume ellipsoid containing a 1 −α fraction of points has vol = 0 versus vol > 0 (see Appendix A). However, this hard instance is pathological, where the optimal ellipsoid is ill-conditioned, with one of the axes lengths being 0 (or close to 0). This motivates restricting our attention to ellipsoids with bounded condition number. Given an ellipsoid E = {x : ∥M−1/2(x −c)∥2 ≤1}, the condition number β(E) ∈[1, ∞) is the ratio of maximum to minimum axes lengths:
β(E) := maxi∈[d] λi(M1/2)
mini∈[d] λi(M) , (3)
where λ1(M), . . . , λd(M) are the eigenvalues of M. The condition number β(E) = 1 for a Euclidean ball, and β →∞as the ellipsoid becomes supported on a proper subspace of Rd. It will be instructive to think of β as being a large constant or polynomial in the dimension d. The main question that we study in this paper is the following.
Question (Minimum β-Conditioned Confidence Ellipsoids). Suppose there exists a βconditioned ellipsoid E⋆that contains (1 −α) fraction of the input points a1, . . . , an ∈Rd. Can we, in polynomial time, find an ellipsoid E containing an 1 −α′ fraction of the points whose volume is Γ-competitive with E⋆i.e.,
vol(E)1/d ≤Γ · vol(E⋆)1/d, (4)
where the missed coverage α′ = f(α) goes to 0 as α →0?
Here the approximation factor Γ(β, d, α) is a function of β, d, α and is measured with respect to vol1/d following the convention in [GSSV25a], and the corresponding approximation factor for volume becomes Γd. The missed coverage α′ = f(α) is ideally a linear or polynomial function of α.

1.1 Our Results
Our main result is a polynomial time algorithm that achieves a rigorous volume guarantee for ellipsoids whose condition number β is bounded.
Theorem 1.1 (Algorithm for β-conditioned ellipsoids). For any parameters α ∈(0, 1), and γ ∈ (0, α), β ≥1, there exists a universal constant c > 0 such that the following holds. There is an algorithm that given a set of n points A = {a1, . . . , an} ∈Rd for which there exists an ellipsoid E⋆⊂Rd that is β-conditioned and |E⋆∩A| ≥(1 −α)n , finds in polynomial time an ellipsoid bE ⊂Rd with Γ = βγ i.e.,
vol1/d( bE) ≤βγ · vol1/d(E⋆), and encloses at least | bE ∩A| ≥ 1 −cα
(See Theorem 2.7 for the formal statement.) This immediately implies a corresponding guarantee for the distributional version, using the VC dimension bound on ellipsoids.
Corollary 1.2 (Distributional version of Theorem 1.1). For any parameters α ∈(0, 1), and γ ∈ (0, α), β ≥1, there is an algorithm that given n i.i.d. samples from an arbitrary distribution D over Rn with an (unknown) β-conditioned ellipsoid E⋆⊂Rd satisfying PD[E⋆] ≥(1 −α) , finds in polynomial time an ellipsoid bE ⊂Rd with
vol1/d( bE) ≤βγ · vol1/d(E⋆), and P D[ bE] ≥1 −O
To interpret our result, consider the setting when α = o(1) (or a very small constant). We can compare against an algorithm that uses as a black-box the guarantee given by [GSSV25a] for Euclidean balls. Since the ellipsoid E⋆is β-conditioned, there is also a Euclidean ball whose volume is within a βd multiplicative factor of it. The result of [GSSV25a] is an “improper learning” algorithm which computes an ellipsoid whose volume is within a exp( ˜O(
d)) factor to the volume of the best ball (while also incurring a small loss in coverage). This leads to a volume approximation factor of 2 ˜O(
d)βd ≈exp(d log β). In other words, this achieves a factor Γ ≈β. In comparison, our algorithm achieves a guarantee of Γ = βγ i.e., a volume approximation of βγd, with a missed coverage of α/γ. In particular, by setting γ = √α, the ellipsoid encloses at least (1 −√α) fraction of the points, and achieves a volume approximation of exp(√α log β · d). In other words Γ = β √α, which is significantly smaller and is βo(1) when α = o(1). Moreover for α < 1/(C2 log β) for some C = ω(1), we can set γ = Cα/ log β to achieve Γ = 1 + o(1) i.e., a volume approximation of exp(o(d)) while enclosing at least 1 −o(1) fraction of the points. This is interesting even in the special case when the center of the ellipsoid is the origin – it is already useful for the robust subspace recovery problem, as we will see later. Moreover, our algorithm deviates significantly from the approach of [GSSV25a] which leveraged a new connection to robust high-dimensional estimation. In contrast, we design and analyze a natural iterative algorithm based on the rich primal-dual structure of the minimum volume enclosing ellipsoid problem, and the D-optimal design problem,2 and serves as a potential subroutine for other robust estimation tasks. Our algorithm achieves a factor Γ = βγ with coverage 1−O(α/γ). The factor Γ is at best βO(α)
(for a small constant γ). Our next result shows that such a loss is almost unavoidable (up to a
2The dual to the minimum volume enclosing ellipsoid SDP is the well-studied D-optimal design problem or equivalently the G-optimal design problem in statistics and experimental design, that tries to weight the covariates of a linear regression problem to minimize the variances of the predictions [Tod16]. See also [Nik15, NS16] for many interesting variants of the D-optimal design problem.
constant factor in the exponent) even when we allow for some multiplicative loss in α, assuming the well-studied small set expansion (SSE) conjecture of Raghavendra and Steurer [RS10], which is closely related to the unique games conjecture [Kho02].
Informal Theorem 1.3 (SSE-hardness for intractability of Γ = βΩ(α)). Assuming the Small-Set Expansion conjecture, there exists small constants α, η > 0 such that no polynomial-time algorithm when given as input n points with a β-conditioned ellipsoid containing a 1 −α fraction of them can achieve a factor Γ < βOη(α) with coverage 1 −(1 + η)α.
See Theorem 4.2 in Section 4 for a formal statement. This hardness result is based on the hardness for robust subspace recovery due to Hardt and Moitra [HM13], and already suggests a strong connection between the two problems.

1.1.1 Robust Subspace Recovery and Other Applications
Our algorithm from Theorem 1.1 gives a new algorithmic tool that can be used for robust estimation problems in high-dimensions. We show that we can use our algorithm to obtain polynomial time algorithmic guarantees for the challenging robust subspace recovery problem. Recall that we are given as input n points a1, . . . , an ∈Rd (which we can assume are unit vectors), an outlier fraction α ∈(0, 1), and a closeness parameter ε ∈(0, 1). The goal is to find a subspace S ⊂Rd (passing through the origin) of smallest possible dimension (or largest co-dimension) that is ε-close in ℓ2 distance to at least (1−α)n points. This is a well-studied problem in statistics, with motivation as a variant of PCA that finds a low-dimensional subspace even in the presence of outliers [LM18, HM13]. Due to the NP-hardness of the problem [Kha95], previous works that provide polynomial time guarantees need to make structural assumptions on either the outliers, or the inliers (points on the subspace). The work of [HM13] assumes genericity (similar to a smoothed analysis assumption) on the outliers and gives elegant polynomial time algorithms when 1 −α ≥k/n, where k is the dimension of the subspace. The work of [BCPV19] improved the condition on α in the smoothed analysis setting, and also provided some noise tolerance ε ≈1/poly(n). More recent works based on sum-of-squares (SoS) relaxations assume distributional assumptions (e.g., Gaussianity or rotational invariance) on the points in the subspace [BK21] with stronger noise tolerance. In contrast we study the worst-case version of the problem, and make no assumptions on either the inliers or outliers. We are unaware of any non-trivial algorithmic guarantee in the worst-case setting of the problem prior to our work. We show that the algorithm for learning small volume confidence ellipsoids can be used as a subroutine to provide algorithmic guarantees for robust subspace recovery in the worst-case.
Informal Theorem 1.4. For any γ ∈(0, 1), there is a polynomial time algorithm, that given as input points A = {a1, . . . , an} ∈Rd with a subspace S⋆of dimension (1 −8γ)d that is ε⋆≤ε4/γ
close to at least (1 −α)n of the given points, finds w.h.p. a subspace S ⊂Rd of dimension at most (1 −γ)d such that at least (1 −O(α/γ))n points are ε close to S.
See Theorem 3.1 for the formal statement. When we know that there are many points that lie exactly on the subspace S, we have ε⋆= 0. We can pick ε to be whatever desired accuracy (that can be arbitrarily close to 0) and apply the above algorithm to find a subspace that is ε-close to the desired number of points. On the other hand, we also get guarantees when the desired accuracy ε is a small constant (for e.g., γ is a constant and ε⋆is a sufficiently small constant) or ε is inverse polynomial in the dimension d (when ε⋆≤1/dO(1/γ)). To the best of our knowledge, this provides the first rigorous polynomial time guarantee for robust subspace recovery in the worst-case setting.
Statistical Applications. Our algorithm for learning confidence ellipsoids has some direct applications to other related problems. One implication of our algorithm is that it gives an algorithm for learning convex confidence sets with bounded condition number that are of approximately minimum volume (Theorem 5.2). This is because any convex set can be well-approximated by an ellipsoid, and our algorithm can provide a good approximation to the ellipsoid. An interesting aspect of this guarantee, is that the family of convex sets has infinite VC dimension. We know that bounded VC dimension is a sufficient condition for a family of confidence sets to be statistically efficiently learnable. However, our result suggests that bounded VC dimension is not a necessary condition for learning an approximately volume optimal confidence set in the family. Another implication of our result is for high-dimensional conformal prediction (Theorem 5.3). In conformal prediction, the goal is to use training examples to construct a prediction set that contains an unseen test example with probability at least 1 −α. An algorithm for finding small confidence sets on arbitrary samples directly implies an efficient conformal prediction algorithm. Please see Section 5 for details.

1.2 Technical Overview

1.2.1 Approximate Minimum Volume Confidence Ellipsoid
Given a set of points A = {a1, . . . , an} ⊆Rd, our goal is to find a small ellipsoid that contains (1 −α)-fraction of the points in A. Let E⋆be the optimal ellipsoid that encloses (1 −α)n points of A, and has condition number at most β. We will refer to the points enclosed by E⋆as the inliers, and the αn points of A that are not enclosed by E⋆as the outliers.
Origin-centered setting and SDP formulation. For the purpose of the technical overview, we will focus on the origin-centered setting, when the center of the ellipsoid is fixed to be the origin. This special case is already challenging and well-motivated, as it captures the application to the robust subspace recovery problem. Moreover it will inspire the main ideas in the algorithm and analysis – the general setting where the center is not the origin is handled by solving an appropriate origin-centered problem in d + 1 dimensions. In Section 2, we present the full algorithm for the general setting where the center of the ellipsoid can be arbitrary. In the rest of this overview, we will present the main algorithmic ideas, and give a proof sketch of the entire analysis. For the classic problem of finding the minimum volume enclosing ellipsoid (origin-centered) containing all of the points in A, then there is a very well-studied formulation of this problem as a semidefinite program (SDP):
s.t. ∀i, a⊤ i Qai ≤1 (MVEE-OC)
Note that the volume of the resulting ellipsoid E = {x : x⊤Qx ≤1} is κd det(Q−1/2), where κd > 0 is the volume of the unit radius ball in d-dimensions. For the purposes of this paper, we can ignore this fixed constant κd, as all the d-dimensional volumes will be scaled by the same amount. This SDP can be solved in polynomial time up to desired accuracy η in polynomial time in d, n, log(1/η). The goal is now to choose αn points of A to leave out, such that it brings down the objective value of the above SDP (MVEE-OC) as much as possible. The above SDP seems challenging to work with directly when we only need to enclose 1 −α of the distribution.
Which points contribute to increasing the volume of the enclosing ellipsoid the most? Intuitively, this is a problem that has to be addressed somehow by the SDP itself, as these points are the ones that the solution has to work hardest to cover. This motivates us to look at the dual formulation, which has a variable that captures how hard it is to satisfy the constraint from each point.
Dual SDP and D-Optimal Design. We instead consider the dual of the minimum volume enclosing ellipsoid problem, which is the classic D-optimal design problem, which is (a scaled version of) the problem of finding a distribution supported on the points ai, that maximizes the determinant of the covariance or second moment matrix (centered at the origin).
max wi,∀i∈[n] log det
s.t. ∀i, wi ≥0 (dual-MVEE)
The weights wi corresponding to the optimal solution of the dual can be shown to satisfy wi ≤1. Intuitively, the far-away outliers will contribute the most to increasing the volume of the enclosing ellipsoid. The dual SDP will likely place a significant fraction of weight on outliers that lie far outside the desired small ellipsoid. Another interpretation of this is via complementary slackness. The points that are assigned non-zero weight in the dual solution are exactly the points that lie on boundary of the optimal ellipsoid in the primal SDP solution. Deleting a point with wi = 0 i.e., one that is contained in the interior of the ellipsoid cannot, by itself, bring down the volume of the enclosing ellipsoid. Hence the weights (wi : i ∈[n]) can be interpreted as a measure of how important the point is to the volume of the enclosing ellipsoid.
Iterative algorithm based on dual and progress in outlier removal. The above intuition suggests the following natural iterative algorithm. Our algorithm proceeds by iteratively solving the dual program (dual-MVEE) on the set of points A = (ai : i ∈[n]). This gives us weights (wi : i ∈[n]), essentially a distribution (the weights sum to d instead of 1). We remove each point ai from the dataset with probability proportional to wi. If significant fraction of the weight (wi : i ∈[n]) is supported on the outlier points, then this strategy makes progress in removing many outliers. We think of this in terms of a tunable parameter γ > 0. If in some iteration, the dual solution places at least γd (out of the total d) weight on outlier points, then in expectation, out of the d discarded points at least γ ≫α fraction of it will be outliers. Hence in every iteration, as long as the dual program (dual-MVEE) puts ≥γd mass on the outliers, we will continue making progress by decreasing the fraction of outliers in the remaining points, while throwing out approximately a γ/α factor more points than the target αn.
Bounding the volume approximation. Eventually, once we have thrown out many outliers, on some iteration the dual will place less than γd weight on outlier points. In this case, the dual solution (wi : i ∈[n]) is mostly supported on the inlier points i.e., the inlier points mostly on the boundary of the optimal solution. The main challenge is to prove that the volume of the enclosing ellipsoid in this iteration is a good approximation of the volume of E⋆. A simple procedure allows us to assume that all of the points ai are within a bounding ball of radius O(β), and that the minimum axis length of E⋆is at least 1. Essentially, we can throw away any points that are further away, as E⋆has condition number β and contained the inliers.
The following lemma is the crucial claim in the analysis and shows that the minimum enclosing ellipsoid in any iteration where the dual places at most o(d) weight on outliers has small volume competitive with the optimal solution E⋆(that encloses only the inliers).
Lemma 1.5 (Good volume approximation when total outlier weight is o(d)). Let A be a set of points a1, . . . , an ∈Rd with ∥ai∥≤β, and E⋆= {x : x⊤S−1x ≤1} be an ellipsoid of aspect ratio at most O(β) that encloses at least (1 −α)n points of A. If the optimal dual solution (dual-MVEE) (wi : i ∈[n]) has total weight at most γd on the outliers A \ E⋆, then the volume of the ellipsoid E corresponding to this dual solution is upper bounded by
i=1 wiaia⊤ ≤log det(S) + O(γd log β) vol(E) ≤det(S) · βO(γd).
Here κd > 0 is the volume of the unit ball of radius 1 in d dimensions.
(See Lemma 2.6 for the formal version of this lemma in the general non-origin centered setting.) To develop some intuition for this lemma, imagine that the weights wi are supported on exactly d points i.e., wi = 1 for exactly d out of the n points, and wi = 0 for all others. Then, if the total weight on the outliers is at most γd as in the assumption of the lemma, then there are at most γd outlier points on the boundary of the enclosing ellipsoid. Any ellipsoid that encloses all of these d points in the support of w also encloses all the points. Hence we can upper bound the volume of the minimum enclosing ellipsoid of all of the n points is by constructing another ellipsoid that contains these d points. First, we contain the (1 −γ)d inlier points by using E⋆. Then, there are at most γd remaining outlier points that need to be included. For each outlier point, we will stretch E⋆in the direction of the outlier point to include it. Since E⋆has width at least 1 in every direction, and each outlier point is at distance O(β) away, we expand the volume of E⋆by a factor at most O(β) for each outlier point that we stretch to include. Thus, in this ideal situation when the weights w from the optimal dual solution are supported on exactly d points, with total weight of γd on the outliers, the volume of the enclosing ellipsoid is at most
vol(E) ≤vol(E⋆) · O(βγd).
Challenge: spread outliers. Of course, in general, the dual weights could be supported on many more than d points. This presents a challenge for the type of analysis sketched above, as that uses not only that there is at most γd weight on outlier points, but also crucially that it is concentrated in at most γd directions. When the outlier weight could be spread out in many directions, it can affect the value of the dual solution significantly more. Consider an example where E⋆has width β in the first d/2 coordinate directions, and width 1 in the remaining d/2 coordinate directions. Then, the volume of E⋆is proportional to βd/2. Suppose the outliers are spread out at distance β in the “thin” directions of E⋆. Then, even if the outliers have total weight at most γd, M = P i wiaia⊤ i could look like
, with det(M) = βd2d/2(1−γ)d/4γd/4 = βd/2 ·(4β2(1−γ)γ)d/4.
M =  2(1 −γ)β2Id/2 2γβ2Id/2
Hence, its volume of the corresponding ellipsoid could be larger than vol(E⋆) = βd/2 by a factor of (β2γ)d/4 ≈βΩ(d) factor. Thinking of β as a large constant, or even polynomially large in d, we would like the exponent in our approximation factor to be brought down by γ as it was in the previous example with only d points.
Using optimality via complementary slackness. The key claim that allows us to prove Lemma 1.5 is that this bad situation when the γd total weight on outliers is spread in ω(γd) directions, will actually never happen in an optimal dual solution! Specifically, in the above example, the dual would actually be able to achieve a much larger determinant by putting ≈d/2 weight on the inliers and ≈d/2 weight on the outliers. This is good, because then we will make progress in removing outliers. More generally, we will use the complementary slackness or KKT conditions for the optimality of the solutions to (MVEE-OC) and (dual-MVEE). Moreover, we will use the following important geometric inequality that uses the log-concavity of the determinant function. This is a geometric form of the famous Brascamp-Lieb inequality due to Keith Ball that was used to prove certain reverse isoperimetric inequalities [Bal89, Bal91].
Claim 1.1 (Geometric Brascamp-Lieb inequality). For any PSD matrix P ∈Rd×d, weights wi > 0, and unit vectors ∥bi∥= 1 such that P i wibib⊤ i = Id, we have
The geometric interpretation implication of the claim is the following: the volume of any ellipsoid can be upper bounded by an appropriate geometric mean of the projected lengths of the ellipsoid onto a set of unit vectors that are isotropic (or more generally form a “tight frame”). We now present a short proof of Lemma 1.5 assuming Claim 1.1 . In Section 2 we show how it yields the general version in Lemma 2.6 that is needed for the analysis of the general algorithm.
Proof of Lemma 1.5 for the Origin-centered Setting. Let w be the optimal solution to the dual program. Let M = P i wiaia⊤ i . Let E⋆= {x : x⊤S−1x ≤1} be the optimal ellipsoid that encloses the inliers. Then, the volume of E⋆is proportional to det(S). To compare the volumes of E⋆and E consider the PSD matrix P = M1/2S−1M1/2. Note that S is full rank by assumption. We have
log det(P) = log det(M) + log det(S−1).
Consider all points ai with weight wi > 0 in the optimal dual solution. By the KKT condition (complementary slackness), we have for any such point ai with wi > 0, a⊤ i M−1ai = 1. Let bi := M−1/2ai. Then this implies that for all i such that wi > 0, the transformed points have length ∥bi∥2 = 1 (i.e., they are on the boundary) and
i:wi>0 wibib⊤ i = M−1/2
Hence the subset of points b1, . . . , bn with weights wi > 0 are isotropic i.e., they form an tight frame. By Claim 1.1, we have
i:wi>0 wi log(b⊤ i Pbi) =
i:wi>0 wi log(a⊤ i M−1/2PM−1/2ai) =
since S−1 = M−1/2PM−1/2. We now split the right-hand side into inliers and outliers. For the inliers ai ∈E⋆, we have i S−1ai ≤1. For the outliers, we have ∥ai∥≤β (from the assumptions of the lemma), and E⋆
has condition number O(β). Hence a⊤ i S−1ai ≤O(β) for all outliers. We are given that the total weight w on the outliers is at most γd. Then, we have
i:wi>0 wi log(a⊤ i S−1ai) ≤γd · O(log β).
Therefore, we bound the optimal dual solution value by
log det(M) = log det(S) + log det(P) ≤log det(S) + γd · O(log β).
This completes the proof of Lemma 1.5. We remark that the above proof does not use optimality of the ellipsoid E⋆for the inliers. In particular, the above proof uses complementary slackness conditions for M, and not for S. Hence E⋆can be any ellipsoid of condition number ≤β containing (1 −α)n points, and our algorithm is guaranteed to find an ellipsoid whose volume is competitive with it. In fact, the algorithm does not need the knowledge of β, and outputs an ellipsoid for which the guarantee holds for any choice of β. We defer the proof for the general (non-origin-centered) setting, and analysis of the entire algorithm to Section 2.

1.2.2 Robust Subspace Recovery
We present an algorithm for robust subspace recovery by leveraging our algorithm for finding the minimum volume confidence ellipsoid. The approach builds on the geometric intuition that if many points lie near a low-dimensional subspace, the smallest-volume ellipsoid covering them must be elongated along that subspace. We then apply a PCA-style procedure that selects the eigenspace corresponding to the large axes lengths of the ellipsoid as an approximation to the underlying subspace. This is related to the example that we discussed above where the outliers are spread out. Due to log-concavity of volume, the volume of the ellipsoid is smaller if we stretch the ellipsoid a lot but only in a few directions, as opposed to streching it a little bit in many directions. The main challenge is that the ellipsoid produced by our algorithm may not be well-conditioned. In some directions, it can have very small eigenvalues, which makes it difficult to bound the dimension of the recovered subspace. To address this, we introduce a random perturbation step. The algorithm adds small, independent Gaussian noise to each point, which enforces an anticoncentration property. This property ensures that in every direction, only a small fraction of points have very small projections. As a result, any ellipsoid that covers most points must be sufficiently “fat” in all directions (see Lemma 3.2 for the technical claim). This ensures a lower bound on the smallest eigenvalues, allowing us to recover a low-dimensional subspace from the ellipsoid’s principal directions.

1.2.3 Hardness
We establish the Small Set Expansion (SSE) hardness for our problem, using the robust subspace recovery problem as an intermediate step. Hardt and Moitra proved the SSE-hardness of robust subspace recovery for low-dimensional subspaces (δd-dimensional), which shows that distinguishing whether there exists a low-dimensional subspace containing a certain fraction of points is SSEhard [HM13]. We then connect this to our algorithmic result for subspace recovery in Section 3, which shows that if there exists a small-volume ellipsoid covering most of the points, then those points must lie close to some subspace.
There are two main challenges. (1) The first challenge is that our PCA-based argument introduces a small gap in the subspace dimension, while the hardness by [HM13] assumes the same dimension in both YES and NO cases. To bridge this, we modify their reduction to tolerate such a dimensional slack, yielding a strengthened hardness for robust subspace recovery with a small dimension gap. (2) Finally, after establishing that many points lie close to a low-dimensional subspace, we still need to argue that there exists a subspace that exactly contains a large fraction of these points. To address this, we replace the randomized construction used by [HM13] with a deterministic construction of the robust subspace recovery instance. This discrete structure ensures that when many points are close to a subspace, we can identify a subspace of comparable dimension that exactly contains a large subset of them (Lemma 4.4), thereby completing the reduction and establishing the SSE-hardness of the minimum volume confidence ellipsoid problem.

1.3 Related Work
d) i.e., a volume approximation of exp( ˜O(
Finding Small Volume Confidence Sets The problem of learning minimum volume confidence sets has been widely studied in statistics and machine learning, due to applications in uncertainty quantification, learning density level sets, anomaly detection, or distribution support estimation [EM92, Pol97, Rou85, GKCW03, SN05, GSSV25b]. The works of [Pol99, SN05] design statistically efficient methods when the VC dimension of the class of confidence sets C is bounded. This problem has also received recent attention due to efficiency or volume optimality considerations in conformal prediction and uncertainty quantification [LRW13, SLW16, GSSV25a, GSSV25b, BAJB25, Sri26]; see [GSSV25a, GSSV25b] for more references. The most relevant prior work is the work on small volume learning confidence balls in high dimensions [GSSV25a]. The class C of Euclidean balls in d dimensions is already computationally challenging for large d. The work of [GSSV25a] studies both improper learning (where the confidence set that is output does not need to be from C) and proper learning algorithms, and designs polynomial time algorithms with rigorous guarantees of approximate volume optimality for C being the set of Euclidean balls (or unions of O(1) balls). The best known polynomial time proper learning algorithm for Euclidean balls achieves Γ = 1 + ˜O(1/ log d) (volume approximation of exp( ˜O(d/ log d)) [BHPI02], while the best improper learning algorithms for learning confidence balls outputs ellipsoids that achieve Γ = 1 + ˜O(1/
d)) [GSSV25a]. This is complemented by a computational intractability result for proper learning better than Γ = 1 + d−ε for some constant ε > 0. The main technical idea is to design a robust proxy for computing the center, inspired by algorithms for robust mean estimation. These results do not give any guarantees when competing against the class C of ellipsoids in d dimensions. For the learning confidence ellipsoids, the challenge is to learn both the center (location), and more importantly, the shape of a good ellipsoid for the distribution. It is an interesting open question to generalize our results to unions of ellipsoids, or use our new algorithm to get an improved improper algorithm for learning Euclidean balls.
Comparison to Prior Work on Robust Estimation. A related direction that has received much attention in both statistics and computer science is robust estimation, where the goal is to develop methods for parameter estimation that are robust to outliers. Here, the uncorrupted data points i.e., the inliers are drawn i.i.d from a nice distribution Dθ over Rd with a parameter θ that we would like to estimate, e.g., a Gaussian with an unknown mean, or unknown covariance. In the input dataset, 1 −α fraction of the samples are drawn from the inlier distribution, while the remaining α fraction are outliers, which are arbitrary points in Rd (stronger contamination models allow for replacing an arbitrary α fraction of the inliers with arbitrary outliers). There is a rich body
of work over the past six decades developing robust methods for several basic parameter estimation tasks under different contamination models [see e.g., extensive books on this topic Hub04, DK23]. Recent work has even used ideas from robust estimation to find small confidence balls [GSSV25a]. Most relevant to us are the works on robust covariance estimation, and robust estimators for the scatter of the distribution in high dimensions. The important works of [DKK+16, LRV16] gave polynomial time algorithms for robust mean and covariance estimation of Gaussians in high dimensions, with near optimal dependencies. Over the past decade there have been several polynomial time algorithms proposed based on filtering, sophisticated convex relaxations including sum-of-squares and many other techniques [please see DK23, for a recent book on the topic]. In particular, for robust covariance estimation, these works assume Gaussianity of the inlier distribution, or various fourth moment or higher-order moment assumptions on the inlier distribution. Such assumptions are necessary to define a certifiable property (e.g., hypercontractivity, anticoncentration) of the inlier distribution in parameter estimation tasks. In contrast, in our setting we do not make any assumptions on the data points — in particular, the points in the optimal solution do not need to satisfy any Gaussianity or hypercontractivity or anticoncentration condition. Moreover, our goal is not to estimate or recover any ground-truth parameter, but instead to find some small volume confidence ellipsoid that contains most points. The classic work of Rousseeuw [Rou85] studies the same problem as the famous minimum volume estimator (MVE) for location and scatter parameters of a distribution. See the survey by [VAR09] for several desirable properties including its high breakdown point and other statistical properties. As described earlier, this problem and heuristics for it have also found applications in control theory, dynamical systems, and uncertainty quantification. However, known algorithms for this problem are either computationally inefficient, or do not come with rigorous guarantees of (approximate) volume optimality.
Robust Subspace Recovery. Finally, the problem of robust subspace recovery in high dimensions has received significant attention on the algorithms side in the past decade starting with the influential work of Hardt and Moitra [HM13]. Polynomial time algorithms that recover a ground-truth subspace in the presence of outliers are only known under additional distributional assumptions about the inliers (points on the subspace) [BK21], or non-degeneracy assumptions/ the smoothed analysis setting on the outliers [HM13, BCPV19]. In particular, the work of Hardt and Moitra gives polynomial time algorithms that recover the ground truth subspace when an α < 1 −d/n fraction of outliers are in general position in the ambient space, and the 1 −α fraction of inliers are in general position in the subspace. One of their algorithms uses a beautiful connection to radial isotropy and a different convex program due to Barthe [Bar97] (which is also related to a reverse version of the Brascamp-Lieb inequality). Please see Section 3 for a more detailed comparison to prior work on robust subspace recovery.
Algorithm and Analysis
Let E⋆be the smallest ellipsoid that contains at least (1 −α)-fraction of the points in A = {a1, . . . , an}. We begin by finding a bounding ball bB that contains all points in E⋆, and has radius at most twice that of the maximum axis length of E⋆. This can be done by a simple search over all pairs of points in A (Theorem C.2). Restricted to bB, it suffices to find an ellipsoid that captures close to (1 −α)n of the embedded points, with volume approximately that of the smallest volume ellipsoid of condition number at most β that captures (1 −α)n points.
We will refer to the (1 −α)n points in A that are captured by the optimal E⋆as inliers. We refer to the remaining αn points in A as outliers. Our algorithm proceeds by iteratively solving the dual program of the minimum volume ellipsoid (Theorem 2.4). This gives us weights, which are essentially a distribution supported on the ai (the weights sum to d instead of 1). We remove each point from the dataset with probability that is proportional to the weight it is assigned in the dual. For a tunable parameter 0 < γ < 1, we show the following. In a given iteration, consider the following cases.
(a) If more than γd weight is placed on outliers, then when we remove points, more than a γ fraction of the points that are removed will be outliers, in expectation (Theorem C.3).
(b) If less than γd weight is placed on outliers, then the minimum volume ellipsoid enclosing all of the remaining points is already a good approximation in volume to the minimum volume ellipsoid enclosing only the inliers (Theorem 2.6).
Since we are only removing points in each iteration, the volume of the minimum volume enclosing ellipsoid of the remaining points can only decrease in each iteration. Thus if we iterate approximately αn
γd times, we will have by the pigeonhole principle that on one of these iterations, less than γd mass was placed on outliers, and therefore the volume approximation held on that and all following iterations. We can ensure that we do not remove too many points via a straightforward Chernoff bound (Theorem C.4). Finding the bounding ball and part (a) of the outline above are straightforward, with proofs relegated to Section C. In this section, we prove (b), which is the main technical contribution.

2.1 SDP and KKT condition
The main technical statement that we need to prove is about the form of the optimum of SDP for the minimum volume enclosing ellipsoid. We are interested in finding the minimum volume enclosing ellipsoid (MVEE) of arbitrary center. This can be found by the following convex program. For a given set of points A, the minimum volume ellipsoid that contains all of the points A can be found via the following convex program.
Proposition 2.1 (Minimum Volume Enclosing Ellipsoid, see e.g. [SF04, TY07] ). For a set of points a1, . . . , an, the minimum volume ellipsoid enclosing the points is given by
{x : (x −c⋆)⊤S⋆(x −c⋆) ≤1}
for X = S1/2 and z = S1/2 c⋆be the optimum of the convex program
min X∈Rd×d,z∈Rd −2 log det X
s.t. ∥Xai −z∥2 2 ≤1, ∀i ∈[n],
The dual of this program is the following.
Proposition 2.2 (Dual program of MVEE). The dual of the program in Theorem 2.1 is given by the convex program
We refer to the value wi as the weight assigned to ai. While it is not given as an explicit constraint, it is without loss of generality that in the optimal solution, every wi ≤1. Furthermore, strong duality holds, and the optimal value of the primal program is equal to the optimal value of the dual program.
Another way to find the MVEE (minimum volume enclosing ellipsoid of arbitrary center) is to reduce to the problem of finding the minimum volume origin-centric ellipsoid. That is, for every point ai ∈Rd, we identify it with the “lifted” point
eai ∈Rd+1 = [ai, 1].
Let E⋆be the MVEE of the original ais. Let eE be the minimum volume origin centric ellipsoid containing the eais. These have the nice property that E⋆is exactly the slice of eE corresponding to the last index being 1, E⋆= eE ∩{x ∈Rd+1 : xd+1 = 1}.
The minimum volume origin centric ellipsoid and its dual problem are given by the following SDPs. We note that the optimal dual solution for the MVEE problem on the ais (Theorem 2.2), and the optimal dual solution for the origin centric minimum volume origin centric ellipsoid containing the eais are exactly the same. We provide a proof in Theorem C.5. To prove the volume approximation guarantee, we find it convenient to adopt the viewpoint of the origin centric dual.
Proposition 2.3 (Minimum Volume Origin Centric Ellipsoid, see e.g. [BV04]). For a set of points a1, . . . , an, the minimum volume centered ellipsoid enclosing the points is given by
for (M⋆)−1 = Q the optimum of the SDP
max Q∈Rn×n log det Q
s.t. ∀i ∈[n], a⊤ i Qai ≤1
Proposition 2.4 (Dual program of origin centered MVE, see e.g. [BV04]). The dual of the program in Theorem 2.3 is given by the SDP
We refer to the value wi as the weight assigned to ai. While it is not given as an explicit constraint, it is without loss of generality that in the optimal solution, every wi ≤1. Furthermore, strong duality holds, and the optimal value of the primal program is equal to the optimal value of the dual program.
Proof of Theorem 2.2. Let wi ≥0 be Lagrange multipliers for the constraints ∥Xai −z∥2 2 ≤1. The Lagrangian relaxation of MVEE is
L(X, z, w) = −2 log det X +
i=1 wi(∥Xai −z∥2 2 −1).
Stationarity in z. Taking the gradient in z and setting it to zero gives
wi(z −Xai) =⇒z = X c, c := i wiai i wi
i=1 wi(ai −c)(ai −c)⊤⪰0.
With z = Xc, the quadratic term in the Lagrangian is
i=1 wi∥X(ai −c)∥2 2 = tr(X⊤XM).
Let S = X2. Using −2 log det X = −log det S, the Lagrangian becomes
L(S, w) = −log det S + tr(SM) −
Stationarity in S. Minimizing over S ≻0 yields the unique optimizer S = M−1, and the minimum value min S≻0 L(S, w) = log det M + d −
Hence, the dual program of MVEE is
max w≥0 log det M + d −
s.t. c = i wiai i wi
i=1 wi(ai −c)(ai −c)⊤.
Scaling all weights by a positive factor t leaves c unchanged and scales M by t. Thus, we have log det M = log det M + d log t while −P i twi = −t P i wi. Optimizing over t makes the total weight P i wi = d at optimum. Thus, we get the dual program. Strong duality. The primal program MVEE has a strictly feasible solution. Therefore, strong duality holds and the optimal values of the primal and dual are equal. Bounds wi ≤1 at optimum. Let (X⋆, z⋆) be any optimal primal solution. Let w⋆ i be the optimal dual solution and M⋆be the corresponding matrix of w⋆ i . Then, we have (M⋆)−1 = (X⋆)2, which implies Id = X⋆M⋆X⋆=
wi(X⋆(ai −c))(X⋆(ai −c))⊤.
Let yi = X⋆(ai −c). By complementary slackness (Theorem 2.5), if w⋆ i > 0 then ∥yi∥= 1. Thus, we have 1 = y⊤ i Idyi =
wj(y⊤ i yj)2 ≥wi(y⊤ i yi)2 = wi,
Proposition 2.5 (Complementary Slackness). Let (X⋆, z⋆) be any optimal primal solution to the MVEE problem in Theorem 2.1, and let w⋆= (w⋆ 1, . . . , w⋆ n) be any optimal dual solution to Theorem 2.2. Then, for every i ∈[n],
∥X⋆ai −z⋆∥2 2 −1 = 0.
In particular, if w⋆ i > 0 then ∥X⋆ai −z⋆∥2 2 = 1, and if ∥X⋆ai −z⋆∥2 2 < 1 then w⋆ i = 0.
Proof. Let (X⋆, z⋆) be any optimal primal solution and w⋆be any optimal dual solution. The KKT complementary slackness conditions are
∥X⋆ai −z⋆∥2 2 −1 = 0, i = 1, . . . , n.
Hence, for any index with w⋆ i > 0, we have ∥X⋆ai −z⋆∥2 2 = 1.

2.2 Volume Approximation
The main component of our proof is a statement that if the optimal dual solution to the origin centric minimum volume enclosing ellipsoid problem does not put much weight on outlier points, then the volume of the enclosing ellipsoid of all of the points is comparable to the smallest ellipsoid of bounded condition number, that contains all of the inliers. Thus, the outliers that are still included do not blow up the volume of the enclosing ellipsoid by too much. The crux of the argument is in the following claim.
Claim 1.1 (Geometric Brascamp-Lieb inequality). For any PSD matrix P ∈Rd×d, weights wi > 0, and unit vectors ∥bi∥= 1 such that P i wibib⊤ i = Id, we have
Proof. Let P = UΛU⊤be the SVD decomposition of P, where Λ = diag(λ1, · · · , λd+1). Let ci = U⊤bi. Then, we have ∥ci∥= ∥bi∥= 1 and P i wicic⊤ i = P i wibib⊤ i = Id+1. For each i, we have
log(b⊤ i Pbi) = log(c⊤ i Λci) = log
where the last inequality is due to the concavity of the log function and Jensen’s inequality. Since P i wicic⊤ i = Id+1, for every j, we have P i wic2 ij = 1. Thus, we have
j=1 log(λj) = log det(P).
We now bound the volume of the ellipsoid provided by our algorithm. We embed each point ai ∈Rd to point eai := (ai, 1) ∈Rd+1 by adding the (d + 1)th coordinate with value 1. We then solve the origin-centered minimum volume ellipsoid for ea1, . . . , ean ∈Rd+1. Let w be the optimal solution to the corresponding dual program in Theorem 2.4. Then, we consider the ellipsoid E in Rd as follows. Let center c = P i wiai/(d + 1) and M = P i wi(ai −c)(ai −c)⊤. The ellipsoid E is {x : (x −c)⊤M−1(x −c) ≤ d+1}.
Lemma 2.6 (Volume approximation). Let ai, . . . , an ∈Rd be points contained in a ball of radius 2β, and E⋆= {x : (x−c⋆)⊤(S⋆)−1(x−c⋆) ≤1} be an ellipsoid with width at least 1 in every direction that encloses the inliers. If the optimal dual solution (Theorem 2.4) places at most γ(d + 1) weight on outliers, then we have the shape matrix M of the ellipsoid E = {x : (x −c)⊤(M)−1(x −c) ≤1} satisfies log det(M) ≤log det(S⋆) + γ(d + 1) · log(16β2).
Proof. It is convenient to rescale the matrix (S⋆)−1 to a matrix S−1 such that
E⋆= x : (x −c⋆)⊤S−1(x −c⋆) ≤ d + 1
We embed each point ai ∈Rd to point eai := (ai ; 1) ∈Rd+1. Let w be the optimal solution to the origin centric dual program (Theorem 2.4) for the lifted instance in Rd+1. Then, we have i wi = d + 1. and the lifted matrix c M ∈R(d+1)×(d+1)
i=1 wi eaiea⊤ i = i wiaia⊤ i wiai i wia⊤ i wi
Let c = Pn i=1 wiai/(d + 1) and M = Pn i=1 wi(ai −c)(ai −c)⊤. We first show that for each lifted point eai ∈Rd+1 with ea⊤ i c M−1eai ≤1, its corresponding point ai ∈Rd is contained in the ellipsoid E = {x : (x −c)⊤M−1(x −c) ≤ d+1}. Note that M−1 is scaled so that the right-hand-side of the inequality is d+1, making it directly comparable to S−1.
To show this, consider the Schur complement c M/c Md+1,d+1 (Theorem C.1) of the (d + 1, d + 1) entry of c M, which is the d × d matrix
i=1 wiaia⊤ i −(d + 1)c · d + 1 · (d + 1)c⊤=
i=1 wi(ai −c)(ai −c)⊤= M.
Then, the inverse of c M is
M−1 = M−1 −M−1c −c⊤M−1 c⊤M−1c + d+1
Hence, we have for every point eai
eai c M−1eai = (ai −c)⊤M−1(ai −c) + d + 1,
which implies that ai ∈E for every eai with eai c M−1eai ≤1.
We now show that the log determinant of c M is close to that of M. By the Schur complement, we have
log det c M = log(d + 1) + log det
i=1 wiaia⊤ i − d + 1 ·
= log(d + 1) + log det
= log(d + 1) + log det M.
i=1 wi(ai −c)(ai −c)⊤
Let E⋆= {x : (x −c⋆)⊤S−1(x −c⋆) ≤ d+1} be the ellipsoid with width at least 1 in every direction that encloses the inliers. Then, the volume of E∗is proportional to det(S). We define the following lifted matrix bS−1 ∈R(d+1)×(d+1)
This lifted matrix corresponds to the shape of an origin-centered ellipsoid in Rd+1. For each embedded point eai ∈Rd+1, we have
ea⊤ i bS−1eai = (ai −c⋆)⊤S−1(ai −c⋆) + d + 1.
We then show that the log determinant of bS is close to that of S. By the Schur complement, we have
log det(bS−1) = −log(d + 1) + log det(S−1) = −log(d + 1) −log det S.
Let P = c M1/2 bS−1 c M1/2. We have
log det P = log det c M + log det(bS−1) = log det M −log det S.
We then use the geometric Brascamp-Lieb inequality in Claim 1.1 to bound log det P. Consider all points eai with weight wi > 0 in the optimal dual solution. By the complementary slackness, we have ea⊤ i c M−1eai = 1. For any such point eai ∈Rd+1, let bi = c M−1/2eai ∈Rd+1. Then, we have ∥bi∥2 = 1 and
i:wi>0 wibib⊤ i = c M−1/2
Thus, by Claim 1.1, we have
wi log ea⊤ i bS−1eai
since P = c M1/2S−1 c M1/2 and bi = c M−1/2eai. We now split the right-hand side into inliers and outliers. For the inliers ai ∈E∗, we have
ea⊤ i bS−1eai = (ai −c⋆)⊤S−1(ai −c⋆) + d + 1 ≤ d + 1 + d + 1 = 1.
The outliers ai ̸∈E∗are contained in a ball of radius 2β, so ∥ai −c⋆∥≤4β. We also have that the width of E⋆is at least 1 in every direction, so S−1 ⪯I, so
ea⊤ i bS−1eai = (ai −c⋆)⊤S−1(ai −c⋆) · d + 1 + d + 1
≤16β2 · d + 1 + d + 1 ≤16β2.
Suppose the weight w puts γ(d + 1) mass on outliers. Then, we have
wi log ea⊤ i bS−1eai ≤γ(d + 1) · log 16β2
Therefore, we bound the optimal dual solution value by
log det(M) = log det(S) + log det(P) ≤log det(S) + γ(d + 1) · log(16β2).
Finally recall that, for convenience, we worked with M−1 being a scaling of M −1 such that
x : (x −c)⊤M −1(x −c) ≤1
E = x : (x −c)⊤M−1(x −c) ≤ d + 1
and similarly S−1 is a scaling of (S⋆)−1 such that
x : (x −c⋆)⊤(S⋆)−1(x −c⋆) ≤1
E⋆= x : (x −c⋆)⊤S−1(x −c⋆) ≤ d + 1
Thus we have log det(M) ≤log det(S⋆) + γ(d + 1) · log(16β2).

2.3 Algorithmic guarantee
Theorem 2.7 (Approximately Optimal Confidence Ellipsoid). Fix a set of points A ⊆Rd, a target miscoverage rate 0 < α < 1, a condition number β ≥1, a parameter 0 < γ < 1, such that γd ≤αn, and a success rate 0 ≤c1 < 1. Then, in poly(n, d) · TSDP time, with probability 1 −o(1), the algorithm in Figure 1 outputs an ellipsoid bE, such that bE approximately satisfies coverage,
and is approximately volume optimal
vol( bE) ≤vol(E⋆) βO(γd) + O(1)
where E⋆is the minimum volume ellipsoid of condition number at most β that encloses at least (1 −α)|A| points of A. Here TSDP is the running time for solving the poly(n, d) sized SDP in Theorem 2.3 and Theorem 2.4.
The running time TSDP of standard semidefinite programming solvers like the ellipsoid method for poly(n, d)-sized SDPs including Theorem 2.3 and Theorem 2.4 is polynomial in n, d and log(1/η) where η > 0 is the desired precision for solving the SDP. Algorithms for solving the specific semidefinite program Theorem 2.3 for the minimum volume enclosing ellipsoid has received particular attention, with faster algorithms based on interior-point methods and first-order methods; see [Tod16, CCLY19] for details and more references. We will ignore numerical precision issues in the analysis, and assume that the SDP can be solved to optimality.
Approximate Coverage Ellipsoid
Input sample points A = {a1, . . . , an} ⊆Rd, target miscoverage 0 < α < 1, parameter 0 < γ < 1 Output an ellipsoid bE ⊆Rd
1. Initialize the candidate set E ←∅.
2. For each ordered pair (k1, k2) ∈[n] × [n]:
(a) Set a coarse bounding ball bB = B(bc, br) with bc = ak1 and br = ∥ak1 −ak2∥.
(b) Form the lifted set
eA ← eai ∈Rd+1 : ai ∈A ∩bB eai := ai, 1
(c) Let J = O (αn/(γd)). Repeat for j = 1, . . . , J:
i. Solve the dual SDP on eA (Prop. 2.4) to obtain weights {wi ∈[0, 1]} for eai ∈eA. ii. Independently remove each eai ∈eA with probability wi.
(d) Let bE be the minimum volume enclosing ellipsoid of bA ←{ai ∈Rd : eai ∈eA}.
(e) If | bE ∩A| ≥(1 −O(α/γ)) n, add bE to E.
3. Repeat step 2 O(log n) times.
4. Return the smallest-volume ellipsoid in E.
n, we can simply output the minimum volume enclosing ellipsoid containing all of A, by solving the relevant SDP (Theorem 2.3, with lifted points). If γ ≤α, then α/γ ≥1, so a trivial ellipsoid with 0 volume and 0 coverage satisfies the guarantee. Thus, we can assume that α, γ > 1
We begin by using the procedure in Theorem C.2 to construct a set B of at most n2 potential bounding balls for the points in A. Let E⋆= {x ∈Rd : (x −c⋆)⊤S−1(x −c⋆) ≤1} be the minimum volume ellipsoid (of arbitrary center), with condition number at most β, that encloses the points We are guaranteed that there exists a ball bB ∈B, such that bB contains all points in E⋆,
and bB has radius at most twice the largest axis length of E⋆. For the sake of analysis, for a candidate ball B ∈B, rescale the ball and the points in the ball so that radius(B) = 2β. For bB this ensures that, in the rescaled space, the maximum axis length of E⋆is at least β, and therefore the minimum axis length of E⋆is at least 1. That is, S−1 ⪯I. For all points ai ∈A ∩B, identify ai ∈Rd with the lifted point eai ∈Rd+1,
Starting with eA = {eai : ai ∈A ∩B} as the included points, the algorithm will do J = O
iterations of the following:
(a) Solve the dual SDP on the included eai to get weights 0 ≤wi ≤1, P i wi = d+1 (Theorem 2.4).
(b) For each included i independently, discard eai from the included points with probability wi.
By Theorem C.3 we have that with probability ≥0.99, there exists some iteration j⋆of this procedure on which less than γ(d + 1) mass was placed on outliers in the dual solution. On such an iteration j⋆, let E(j⋆) = {x ∈Rd : (x −c)⊤M−1 (j⋆)(x −c) ≤1} be the minimum volume ellipsoid that encloses all of the ai that are included on iteration j⋆. By Theorem 2.6, we have that
log det(M(j⋆)) ≤log det(S) + γ(d + 1) log(16β2).
On iterations subsequent to j⋆, we only remove points eai from being included. Thus, after the last iteration the dual SDP value is only lower. For an ellipsoid E = {x ∈Rd : (x−c)⊤M−1(x−c) ≤ 1}, the volume of E is vol(E) = κd det(M)1/2, where κd is the volume of a unit ball in d dimensions. Thus log vol( bE) ≤log vol(E⋆) + γ(d + 1) log(16β2).
By Theorem C.4, we have that with probability ≥0.99, we remove at most O
over all iterations. bB started with at least (1 −α)n points ai. Thus, with probability ≥0.98, bE simultaneously achieves approximate coverage
and bE approximates E⋆in volume:
vol( bE) ≤vol(E⋆) βO(γd) + O(1)
Finally, when we aggregate the candidate ellipsoids from each of the candidate B ∈B, conditioned on bE achieving the desired coverage, we will have that the output ellipsoid will achieve coverage and have volume at most that of bE. Thus the output of the algorithm will achieve coverage and volume approximation if this procedure succeeded on at least one of the O(log n) trials, which occurs with probability at least
1 −(0.02)O(log n) = 1 −o(1).
We analyze the runtime of the algorithm. There are at most n2 bounding balls in B. For each ball, checking which points lie within it, and doing the embedding procedure can be done in poly(n, d) time. Then, we solve the dual SDP J = O(αn
γd ) times. Since γ ≥1/n (see opening paragraph of proof), the number of iterations is poly(n). We solve the relevant SDPs in TSDP time. The outlier removal procedure takes O(n) time per iteration. Finally, we solve one last SDP per iteration, and compare O(n2) candidate solutions. Thus, in total, the runtime of the algorithm is poly(n, d) · TSDP.
Algorithm for Subspace Recovery
In this section, we will design an algorithm for the robust subspace recovery problem using our algorithm for finding the minimum volume ellipsoid with outliers.
Unlike previous works, we address the worst-case version of the problem. In particular, we make no genericity, smoothed analysis, or structural assumptions on either the outliers or the inliers, as is done in [HM13, BCPV19]. More recent works based on sum-of-squares (SoS) relaxations assume distributional assumptions (e.g., Gaussianity) on the points in the subspace [BK21]. As mentioned earlier, the worst-case problem is computationally intractable [HM13]; see also Section 4. Hence we will aim for approximation guarantees i.e., polynomial time algorithms that is (approximately) competitive in terms of all the parameters: the dimension, fraction of outliers α, and the closeness parameter ε. Note that in the absence of any structural assumptions on the outliers or inliers, our goal is to find a subspace of small dimension that is close to many points; it may not be possible to recover any ground truth subspace.
Algorithm for Robust Subspace Recovery
Input: a set of points (unit vectors) a1, . . . , an ∈Rd, parameter γ > 0, closeness parameter ε ∈(0, 1) Output: a subspace S ⊂Rd passing through the origin
1. Set ε⋆:= ε4/γ. We randomly perturb the points to get a′ 1, . . . , a′ n with ˜ai = ai + ζi where ζ ∼N(0, ε2 d Id). Normalize the points to get points a′ i = ˜ai/∥˜ai∥2 for each i ∈[n].
3. Let bS be the top singular space of ˆ M spanned by all the singular vectors with corresponding singular value ≥ε2. Return bS.
The above algorithm runs our robust minimum volume enclosing ellipsoid algorithm on a small random perturbation applied to our given points. The random perturbation is performed by our algorithm, and it is applied to all the points. We remark that this is different from the smoothed analysis setting where the algorithm is given randomly perturbed points as input, where the points in the subspace are assumed to be randomly perturbed in a way that keeps them inside the (unknown) ground-truth subspace. In contrast, our algorithm applies to an arbitrary set of points given as input.
Theorem 3.1. Let α ∈(0, 1), and γ ∈(0, 1), ε ∈(0, 1) be input parameters. There exists universal constants c1, c2 > 0, C > 1 such that the following holds for ε⋆≤ε4/γ. Suppose we
3Given a subspace S ⊂Rd of dimension s given by an (orthogonal) projection matrix ΠS of rank s, we will say that a point a ∈Rd is ε-close to subspace S iff ∥Π⊥ S a∥2 = ∥(I −ΠS)a∥2 ≤ε∥a∥2.
are given as input n ≥Cd log(d/ε⋆) unit vectors A = {a1, . . . , an} ∈Rd, with a subspace S⋆of dimension (1 −8γ)d that is ε⋆close to at least (1 −α)n of the given points. Then the algorithm in Figure 2 runs in polynomial time in n, d and finds w.h.p. a subspace S ⊂Rd of dimension at most (1 −γ)d such that at least (1 −α′)n points are ε close to S, for α′ = c2α/γ.
We remark that the condition n ≥Cd log(d/ε⋆) is essentially without loss of generality since we can just resample (or take multiple copies of the dataset) and run the same algorithm to get a similar guarantee; this dependence will feature in the running time. When we know that there are many points that lie exactly on the subspace S, we have ε⋆= 0. So we can pick ε to be whatever desired accuracy (that can be arbitrarily close to 0) and since ε⋆= 2−log(1/ε)/γ (note that the number of bits of precision is only log(1/ε)/γ), and apply the above algorithm to find a subspace that is ε-close to the desired number of points. Before we proceed to the proof, we first need the following claim that uses the random perturbations to the points to prove that any ellipsoid that encloses a significant fraction of the points needs to sufficiently fat.
This lemma follows directly from the following anti-concentration claim that shows that in every direction most points are far from the origin.
Claim 3.1. In the notation of Lemma 3.2 for some universal constant c, c′ > 0, we have with probability 1 −exp(−c′n) −n exp(−2d),
∀u ∈Rd s.t ∥u∥= 1,  i ∈[n] : ⟨a′ i, u⟩2 ≤ 256d
We defer the proof of Claim 3.1 to later. The choice of the constant 0.2 is arbitrary, and can be chosen as desired.
Proof of Lemma 3.2. We condition on the event (7) in Claim 3.1. Consider any ellipsoid E = {x : x⊤M−1x ≤1} containing T ⊆{a′ 1, . . . , a′ n} with |T| ≥4n/5. Let λ be the smallest eigenvalue of M, and let u be a corresponding eigenvector of unit length. Then
∀i ∈T, 1 ≥(a′ i)⊤M−1a′ i ≥⟨a′ i, u⟩2
=⇒∀i ∈T, ⟨a′ i, u⟩2 ≤λ.
From Claim 3.1, we conclude that λ ≥ 256d.
We now proceed to the proof of the main theorem of the section.
Proof of Theorem 3.1. Set γ⋆= 8γ, ε⋆= ε4/γ. Suppose there exists a subspace S⋆(passing through the origin) of dimension (1 −γ⋆)d that is ε⋆-close to (1 −α)n points in A. Let Π ∈Rd×d be the projection matrix onto the subspace S⋆and Π⊥= I −Π be the projection onto the subspace orthogonal to S⋆. We first show that there is a well-conditioned ellipsoid E⋆of small volume containing the points that are ε⋆-close to S⋆. Consider the ellipsoid E⋆given by
We have ∥ai∥2 = 1 for all points i ∈[n]. If ai is ε⋆-close to S⋆, then
Moreover, the ellipsoid E⋆has condition number β = 1/ε⋆, and its volume is
vol(E⋆) = κd · 2(1−γ⋆)d/2(2ε2 ⋆)γ⋆d/2 = κd · 2d/2εγ⋆d
where κd is the volume of a unit radius ball in d dimensions. By running the algorithm from Theorem 1.1 on these points, we get an origin-centered ellipsoid bE = {x : x⊤c M−1x ≤1}. Let T = {i ∈[n] : a′ i ∈bE}; then |T| ≥(1 −c′α/γ)n, and
vol( bE) ≤βγdvol(E⋆) ≤κd · 2d/2ε(γ⋆−γ)d ≤κd · 2d/2ε
since γ⋆= 8γ. Let bS be the subspace spanned by the eigenvalues of c M larger than ε, and let bΠ be the projection matrix onto the subspace bS, and bΠ⊥be the projection onto the subspace orthogonal to bS. Then
∀i ∈T, 1 ≥∥c M−1/2a′ i∥2 2 ≥∥bΠ⊥a′ i∥2 ∥bΠ⊥a′ i∥2 2 ≤ε2.
Hence every point a′ i for each i ∈T is ε-close to bS, as required. By triangle inequality, along with standard length concentration of Gaussians, we have that ai is ε + O(ε⋆) ≤2ε-close to bS. It remains to lower bound the co-dimension of bS. Let the codimension ˆk := d −dim(bS). Let c have eigenvalues ˆλ1 ≥ˆλ2 ≥· · · ≥ˆλd ≥0; then ˆλd−ˆk ≥ε2. From Lemma 3.2, we have ˆλd ≥c2ε2 ⋆/d w.h.p.. Conditioning on this, we have
8 γ⋆·d ≥vol( bE) = κd
where the last inequality is from ε⋆≤ε4/γ. Since ε⋆≤ε4/γ and γ⋆= 8γ, we have εγ⋆/4 = ε2γ ≤ε8. Thus, by picking closeness parameter ε ≤2−1/8, we have
Putting this together with (9), we get
8γ⋆d · log(1/ε⋆) 2 log(1/ε⋆) + log(d/c2)
where the last inequality is due to log(1/ε⋆) ≥log(1/ε4/γ) ≥log(d/c2) by picking ε sufficiently small. This lower bounds the codimension of bS. This completes the proof.
We now complete the proof of the helper claim.
Proof of Claim 3.1. This follows from a relatively standard net-based argument. Set η :=
and consider an η-net Nη of unit vectors in Rd; |Nη| ≤   2+η
d. For a fixed unit vector u ∈Nη and
a fixed i ∈[n], the small ball probability (or anticoncentration) of the Gaussian ζ ∼N(0, ε2 d I)),
For a fixed u ∈Nη, P h i ∈[n] : |⟨a′ i, u⟩| ≤
By doing a union bound over all u ∈Nη, we have that since n ≥2
o ≥0.2n ≤|Nη| · exp(−c1n) ≤exp(−1
 i ∈[n] : |⟨a′ i, u⟩| ≤
Thus we conclude that with high probability
 i ∈[n] : |⟨a′ i, v⟩| ≤
Computational Intractability and Unavoidability of Γ = βΩ(α)
In this section, we provide evidence of the computational intractability of the robust minimum volume enclosing ellipsoid problem. We show the hardness result for this problem, assuming the Small Set Expansion (SSE) hypothesis of [RS10], which is closely related to the Unique Games Conjecture [Kho02].
Conjecture 4.1 (SSE hypothesis of [RS10]). For any ε > 0, there is a constant δ ∈(0, 1) such that there is no polynomial time algorithm to distinguish between the following two cases given a graph G = (V, E) on n vertices with degree ∆:
• YES: Some subset S ⊆V with |S| = δn satisfies that the induced subgraph on S is dense i.e., the number of edges going out of S is |E(S, V \ S)| ≤ε∆|S| edges.
• NO: Any set S ⊆V with 1
2εδn ≤|S| ≤2δn has most of the edges incident on it going outside i.e., |E(S, V \ S)| ≥(1 −ε)∆|S|.
Define the edge expansion of a ∆-regular graph G at scale δ by
ϕG(δ) := min S:|S|≤δn |E(S, V \ S)|
Then, the SSE hypothesis asserts that it is computationally hard to distinguish between: (1) YES case, where ϕG(δ) ≤ε, and (2) NO case, where ϕG(δ′) ≥1 −ε for all δ′ ∈[δε/2, 2δ].
Theorem 4.2 (SSE–hardness). Fix any ε, δ ∈(0, 0.1) and γ ∈(0, δ) and α ∈(0, 1). There exist C ≥10 and d0 such that for all d ≥d0 the following holds. Given a graph G, we can construct in polynomial time a set A = {a1, . . . , an} ⊆Rd with the property:
• YES: If ϕG(δ) ≤ε, then there exists an β-conditioned ellipsoid covering (1 −α)n points in A with volume at most K; and
• NO: If ϕG(δ′) ≥1 −ε for all δ′ ∈[δε/2, 2δ], then every ellipsoid covering (1 −(1 + δ/2)α)n points has volume at least βγd/2 K, where β = 1/eε,
K := κd 2d/2 eε(1−δ)d, eε := d−C,
and κd is the volume of the Euclidean unit ball in Rd.
Consequently, unless the Small-Set Expansion conjecture fails, no polynomial-time algorithm can approximate the volume of the optimal β-conditioned ellipsoid with coverage 1 −α within a factor of βγd/2.
We use the reduction from the Small Set Expansion to the robust subspace recovery by [HM13]. We use a modified version with a deterministic construction and a slackness in the dimension of the subspace as follows.
Theorem 4.3. Let ε, δ ∈(0, 0.1) and α ∈(0, 1). There is a polynomial-time reduction mapping a ∆-regular graph G to an instance U = {u1, . . . , un} ⊂Rd of unit vectors such that:
• YES: If ϕ(δ) ≤ε, there exists a subspace S⋆of dimension δd containing at least 1−α fraction of the points.
Proof of Theorem 4.3. We construct the instance U similar to the reduction by [HM13] as follows. Let G(V, E) be a ∆-regular graph on d vertices. For each edge e = (i, j) ∈E, let u′ e = (ei+ej)/
Completeness. Assume ϕG(δ) ≤ε. Then, by Theorem 4.3, there exists a δd-dimensional subspace S⋆containing at least (1 −ε)δm points of U′. Since S⋆is a coordinate subspace, all T appended points at the origin lie in S⋆as well. Therefore, we have
m + T = 1 −m −(1 −ε)δm
m + T ≥1 −δ −(1 −ε)δ2
where the last inequality is from T = ηm/δ. For any α ∈(0, 1), we choose the number of appended points T = ηm/δ such that η satisfies α = δ−(1−ε)δ2
δ+η . Then, this subspace S⋆contains at least 1−α fraction of the points in U.
Claim 4.1. For every integer r with δε
2 d ≤r ≤2δd, every set P ⊆U′ that lies in some subspace of dimension at most r satisfies |P|
Equivalently, any r-dimensional subspace contains at most a 4ε · (r/d) fraction of the points in U′.
By Claim 4.1, |U′ ∩S| ≤4ε r
d m = 4εδ′ m ≤8εδ m.
Since ε ∈(0, 0.1), we have 1 −ε ≥8ε. Then, we have
δ + η = 1 −α −(1 −9ε)δ2
δ + η ≤1 −α −(1 −9ε)δα,
where the last inequality is from α ≤δ/(δ + η). Thus, the subspace S contains at most 1 −(1 + (1 −9ε)δ)α fraction of points in U.
Proof of Claim 4.1. Let P ⊆U be contained in a subspace of dimension at most r, let F ⊆E be the corresponding edge set, and let S := NB(F) ⊆V be the neighborhood of F in the bipartite incidence graph B = (E, V ). We require the following claim, corresponding to Claim 3.4 in [HM13]. As their argument relies on a randomized construction, we include a proof using our deterministic construction in Appendix B.
Claim 4.2. For every set of points P ⊆U corresponding to a set of edges F ⊆E, we have
≤dim(span P) ≤|NB(F)|.
By Claim 4.2, we have |S|
≤dim(span P) ≤|S|. (11)
Then, we have r ≤|S| ≤2r. We consider two cases. Case 1: |S| ≤2δd. Since |S| ≥r ≥δεd, let δ′ = |S|/d ∈[δε/2, 2δ]. By the small-set expansion hypothesis, the number of edges leaving S is at least |E(S, V \ S)| ≥(1 −ε)∆|S|. Since ∆|S| = 2|E(S, S)| + |E(S, V \S)|, we obtain
As F ⊆E(S, S) and |S| ≤2r, we get
Dividing by m = ∆d/2 yields |P|/m ≤2ε (r/d).
Case 2: |S| > 2δd. Set s := 2δd and let S′ ⊆S be a size-s subset maximizing |E(S′, S′)|. By averaging (equivalently, taking expectation over a uniform size-s subset of S),
 |S|  |E(S, S)| ≥  s
Applying the expansion hypothesis to S′ (note |S′| = 2δd) gives
Combining with (12) and using |S| ≤2r from (11),
where the last step uses r/d ≤2δ since r ≤2δd. Combining both cases yields the claimed bound |P|/m ≤4ε (r/d).
Proof of Theorem 4.2. We construct a set of points A as follows. Given a Small Set Expansion instance G(V, E), let U = {ui}n i=1 be the set of points constructed by Theorem 4.3 with parameters (ε, δ). We then add random perturbations to these points and normalize them to unit vectors. Independently sample zi ∼N(0, eε2Id/d) with eε = d−C for a fixed constant C ≥10, and set ai = (ui + zi)/∥ui + zi∥. We then consider the set of points A = {ai} and target coverage 1 −α for α ∈(0, 1).
Completeness. If ϕG(δ) ≤ε, then by Theorem 4.3, there exists a subspace S⋆⊂Rd of dimension δd containing at least (1 −α)n points of U. Let Π be the projection to this subspace S∗of dimension δd. Then, for any eε ∈(0, 1) define the ellipsoid
If a unit vector a is eε-close to S then a ∈E⋆; and
vol(E⋆) = κd 2δd/2 (2eε2)(1−δ)d/2 = κd 2d/2 eε(1−δ)d, (14)
where κd is the volume of the Euclidean unit ball in Rd. For any points ui ∈S, and by a Gaussian tail, ∥zi∥2 ≤eε w.h.p., hence dist(ai, S) ≤eε. Thus, we have all such ai lie in the β-conditioned ellipsoid E⋆with volume K.
Soundness. We now consider the NO case. Suppose, toward contradiction, that there exists an ellipsoid E = {x : x⊤M−1x ≤1} such that for α′ = (1 + δ/2)α ≥(1 + (1 −9ε)δ)α −40δd/n
|E ∩A| ≥(1 −α′)n and vol(E) ≤βγd/2 K. (15)
Let E∗be a minimum-volume ellipsoid in Rd covering at least (1 −α′) fraction of the points in A, and let M∗be its shape matrix. Then
vol(E∗) ≤vol(E) det(M∗) vol(E)
Since vol(E) ≤βγd/2K, we have
det(M∗) ≤βγd 2d eε2(1−δ)d. (16)
We now bound the small eigenvalue directions in M∗. Let the eigenvalues of M∗be λ1 ≥· · · ≥ λd > 0. Fix a constant threshold τ := ε2 0 with ε0 ∈(0, 0.01), and let bT ⊂Rd be the span of eigenvectors with eigenvalues λi ≥τ. Let bkd := d −dim( bT) be the number of small eigenvalues and Π⊥ bT be the projection to orthogonal directions of bT. For any point ai contained in E∗, we have
1 ≥a⊤ i (M∗)−1ai ≥∥Π⊥ bT ai∥2 2/τ. Thus, every covered point is ε0-close to the subspace bT; hence at
least (1 −α′)n of the points in A satisfy dist(˜ai, bT) ≤ε0. By Lemma 3.2, with high probability λmin(M∗) ≥ceε2/d for some constant c, so
bkd ≤det(M∗) ≤βγd 2d eε2(1−δ)d. (17)
Let Y := log d −(log(ceε2) −log τ) > 0. Taking logs in the first inequality of Equation (17) and rearranging gives bkd ≥−log det(M∗) + log τd
Taking logs in the second inequality of Equation (17) and eε = d−C, we have
log det(M∗) ≤log(2deε(2−2δ−γ)d) ≤d log 2 + (2 −2δ −γ) d log eε
= −(2 −2δ −γ) d C log d + O(d).
Thus, we have −log det(M∗) ≥(2 −2δ −γ) d · C log d −O(d). We have Y = log d −(log(ceε2) − log τ) = (2C + 1) log d + O(1). Therefore, by Equation (18), we have for sufficiently large d,
bkd ≥(2 −2δ −γ) d · C log d −O(d)
(2C + 1) log d + O(1) 1 −δ −γ
dim( bT) ≤d −bkd ≤ δ + γ
Since γ ∈(0, δ), for sufficiently large C > 0, we have dim( bT) ≤7/4 · δd. Thus, we have at least (1−α′) fraction of the points in A are ε0 close to this subspace bT with dimension less than 7/4·δd. We now show that for these points ai that are close to this subspace bT, a large fraction of the points ui before random perturbation lie exactly in a subspace with dimension at most 2δd. Since ai = (ui + zi)/∥ui + zi∥, we have
∥ai −ui∥≤∥ui −(ui + zi)∥+ ∥(ui + zi) −ai∥≤∥zi∥+ |1 −∥ui + zi∥| ≤2∥zi∥.
Lemma 4.4 (Exact containment from many near points). Let S ⊂Rd be an r-dimensional subspace and set P := PS. Fix ε ∈(0, 1/4) and define the set of ε-close edges
F := {i, j} ∈E : ∥(I −P)uij∥2 ≤ε
2. Let θ ∈(0, 1) and define the heavy index set J := {i : Pii ≥θ2}. Then:
where uij = (ei + ej)/
(a) |J| ≤r/θ2 (since P i Pii = tr(P) = r).
−ε2 ≥0. Then all but at most (r/t2) edges of F have both endpoints in J. Consequently, {{i, j} ∈F : i, j ∈J} ≥|F| −r
In particular, the coordinate subspace SJ := span{ek : k ∈J} has dim(SJ) = |J| ≤r/θ2 and contains exactly all edges in F ∩E(J, J).
Proof. Part (a) is immediate from P i Pii = r. For (b), take any edge {i, j} ∈F with i /∈J (so Pii < θ2). Since
∥(I −P)vij∥2 2 = 1 −∥Pvij∥2 2 = 1 −1
2(Pii + Pjj + 2Pij) ≤ε2,
we obtain Pii + Pjj + 2Pij ≥2(1 −ε2).
Using Pii < θ2 and Pjj ≤1,
2Pij ≥2(1 −ε2) −Pii −Pjj ≥2(1 −ε2) −(1 + θ2),
hence Pij ≥t := 1−θ2
−ε2. For this fixed i /∈J, the number of neighbors j with Pij ≥t is at most
where the equality is due to P 2 = P for any projection matrix. Summing over all i /∈J bounds the number of edges in F with at least one light endpoint:
The remaining edges in F lie in E(J, J), and each such vector vij is supported in J, hence lies exactly in SJ.
Application to Convex Confidence Sets and Conformal Prediction

5.1 Convex confidence sets
Our routine for approximating the optimal confidence ellipsoid of a given aspect ratio β, naturally gives a guarantee for approximating the optimal convex confidence set of a distribution. This is
because any convex set is well-approximated by an ellipsoid (via John’s theorem), and indeed any well-conditioned convex set is well-approximated by a well-conditioned ellipsoid. This highlights an interesting aspect of the problem of learning confidence sets. We know that for a family F of confidence sets, F having bounded VC dimension is sufficient to ensure that we can statistically efficiently learn an approximate best confidence set in F. However, bounded VC dimension is not a necessary condition! Indeed the family of convex sets (and even the family of well-conditioned convex sets) has infinite VC-dimension, even in 2 dimensions. Bounded VC-dimension is not necessary to achieve coverage, because it is a qualitatively different goal than achieving low binary classification error. To achieve low binary classification error, it is important to include the positive examples in the set, and exclude the negative examples from your set. However, to achieve coverage, it is only important that enough points are included in the set, and there is no penalty for including extra points. Another way of seeing this is that the convex set that we are trying to approximate may have significantly different coverage on the population than on the empirical sample. However, it is well-approximated by an ellipsoid, and that ellipsoid must have similar coverage on the population and the sample via uniform convergence.
Definition 5.1 (Aspect ratio of a convex body). Let X ⊂Rd be a convex body with nonempty interior. Denote by
r(X) := max x∈Rd sup{ r > 0 : B(x, r) ⊆X }, R(X) := min x∈Rd inf{ R > 0 : X ⊆B(x, R) },
the inradius and circumradius of X, respectively, where B(x, r) denotes the Euclidean ball of radius r centered at x. The aspect ratio of X is
Theorem 5.2 (Competing with convex confidence sets). Fix parameters α ∈(0, 1) and γ ∈(0, α). Let A = {a1, . . . , an} ⊂Rd. There exists a universal constant c > 0 and a polynomial-time algorithm that outputs an ellipsoid bE ⊂Rd with the following property: For the minimum volume convex set K⋆⊂Rd with |K⋆∩A| ≥(1−α)n, let κ(K∗) be the aspect ratio of K∗. Then the output bE satisfies
vol( bE)1/d ≤t1+γ κ(K∗)γ vol(K⋆)1/d, and | bE ∩A| ≥ 1 −c α
d if K∗is centrally symmetric; otherwise td = d.
Proof. Let EJ be the John ellipsoid of K⋆. By John’s theorem, EJ ⊆K⋆⊆td EJ with td = d in general and td =
vol( bE)1/d ≤βγ J vol(E′)1/d = βγ J td vol(EJ)1/d ≤βγ J td vol(K⋆)1/d,
using vol(EJ) ≤vol(K⋆) because EJ ⊆K⋆. The inlier bound | bE ∩A| ≥ 1 −cα
n is inherited directly from Theorem 1.1.
Let λmin and λmax be the minimum and maximum eigenvalues of the shape matrix of EJ, respectively. Then, √λmin and √λmax are the minimum and maximum axes lengths of EJ. Since EJ ⊆K∗⊆tdEJ, we have R(K∗) ≥√λmax and td √λmin ≥r(K∗). Thus, we have

5.2 Conformal Prediction
A natural application of learning confidence sets is to conformal prediction. In conformal prediction, we want to construct a prediction set that covers an unseen test point with probability at least 1−α, assuming only that the test point and the training (empirical) samples are exchangeable. Our algorithm for learning confidence ellipsoids directly implies an algorithm for conformal prediction as follows.
Theorem 5.3 (Conformal Prediction with Approximate Volume Optimality). Fix parameters α ∈ (0, 1), γ ∈(0, α) and a condition number cap β ≥1. Let Eβ denote the class of all origin-centered ellipsoids in Rd whose condition number is at most β. There is a polynomial-time conformal prediction algorithm that, given Y1, . . . , Yn ∈Rd, outputs a prediction set bC ⊆Rd such that:
(a) Marginal coverage. If Y1, . . . , Yn+1 are exchangeable, then
(b) Approximate volume optimality versus β-conditioned ellipsoids. If Y1, . . . , Yn+1 are i.i.d. from an arbitrary distribution D on Rd, then for any δ ∈(0, 1), whenever n = Ω(d2/γ2), the following holds with probability at least 1 −δ over the training sample:
vol( bC)1/d ≤βγ vol 1/d,
where C⋆ β is the optimal β-conditioned ellipsoid achieving a slightly stronger coverage constraint, such that for a universal constant c > 0
β ∈arg min C∈Eβ vol(C) s.t. Y ∼D[Y ∈C] ≥1 −cαγ.
Proof. Suppose data points Y1, . . . , Yn+1 are drawn i.i.d. from an arbitrary distribution D. By Corollary 1.2, since n = Ω(d2/γ2) and γ < α, our algorithm finds a set bC such that
vol( bC)1/d ≤βγ vol 1/d,
where C⋆ β is an β-conditioned ellipsoid satisfies
β ∈arg min C∈Eβ vol(C) s.t. Y ∼D[Y ∈C] ≥1 −cαγ.
P[Yn+1 ∈bC] = Y ∼D[Y ∈bC] ≥1 −O
We then construct a conformal prediction by constructing a nested system as in [GSSV25a]. This conformal predictor satisfies the margin coverage under exchangeable data.
We thank Mohit Singh and Xue Chen for helpful discussions. This research project was supported by NSF-funded Institute for Data, Econometrics, Algorithms and Learning (IDEAL) through the grants NSF ECCS-2216970 and ECCS-2216912. Chao Gao was also supported in part by NSF Grants DMS-2310769, NSF CAREER Award DMS-1847590, and an Alfred Sloan fellowship. Vaidehi Srinivas was also supported by the Northwestern Presidential Fellowship. Aravindan Vijayaraghavan was also supported by NSF CCF-2154100, and an Amazon research award. gratefully acknowledge the support of the NSF-Simons AI-Institute for the Sky (SkAI) via grants NSF AST-2421845 and Simons Foundation MPS-AI-00010513, and the support of the NSF-Simons National Institute for Theory and Mathematics in Biology (NITMB) via grants NSF DMS-2235451 and Simons Foundation MP-TMPS-00005320.

Corrected and expanded version
Samson Abramsky1 and Achim Jung2
This text is based on the chapter Domain Theory in the Handbook of Logic in Computer Science, volume 3, edited by S. Abramsky, Dov M. Gabbay, and T. S. E. Maibaum, published by Clarendon Press, Oxford in 1994. While the numbering of all theorems and deﬁnitions has been kept the same, we have included comments and corrections which we have received over the years. For ease of reading, small typographical errors have simply been corrected. Where we felt the original text gave a misleading impression, we have included additional explanations, clearly marked as such. If you wish to refer to this text, then please cite the published original version where possible, or otherwise this on-line version which we try to keep available from the page http://www.cs.bham.ac.uk/˜axj/papers.html We will be grateful to receive further comments or suggestions. Please send them to A.Jung@cs.bham.ac.uk So far, we have received comments and/or corrections from Liang-Ting Chen, Francesco Consentino, Joseph D. Darcy, Mohamed El-Zawawy, Miroslav Haviar, Weng Kin Ho, Klaus Keimel, Olaf Klinke, Xuhui Li, Homeira Pajoohesh, Dieter Spreen, and Dominic van der Zypen.
1Computing Laboratory, University of Oxford, Wolfson Building, Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3QD, England. 2School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT, England.
Guide to the literature 152

Domain Science & Engineering
A Basis for Understanding Man-made Worlds
A Foundation for Software Development

UNDER REVISION
Phenomena of Natural and Artefactual Universes of Discourse
Entities = Describables
Perdurants Perdurants Endurants
Discrete Endurants External Qualities
Single Sort Part Sets
Part−materials Conjoins
Alternative Sorts Part Sets
Material−parts−parts Conjoins
Single Sort Part Sets
Altern. Sorts Parts Sets
Unique Identifiers Mereologies Attributes
transcendental injection of endurants into perdurants
Dines Bjørner Professor Emeritus Fredsvej 11 Technical University of Denmark DK 2840 Holte DK-2800 Kgs.Lyngby Denmark Denmark
This is the ‘coloured’ version of my monograph. It is the one without cross-references to the overhead/foil/slide/screen version.
UNDER REVISION means that there may be some inconsistencies in Chapter 3 text
This monograph was ﬁrst put together in March–June 2020 There was a corona virus pandemic at that time This version was compiled August 16, 2020: 11:41 am
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41
Kari; Charlotte and Nikolaj; Camilla, Marianne, Katrine, Caroline and Jakob
Preface The Triptych Dogma
In order to specify software, we must understand its requirements. In order to prescribe requirements
we must understand the domain. So we must study, analyse and describe domains.
The claim of this monograph is twofold:
that domain engineering is a viable, yes, we would claim, necessary initial phase of software development1; and that domain science &2 engineering is a worthwhile topic of research3.
I mean this rather seriously:
How can one think of implementing software, preferably satisfying some requirements, without demonstrating that one understands the domain ?
So in this monograph I shall
explain what domain engineering is, some of the science that goes with it, and how one can “derive” requirements prescriptions (for computing systems) from domain descriptions.
But there is an altogether different reason, also, for presenting these papers in monograph form:
Software houses may not take up the challenge to develop software that satisﬁes customers expectations, that is, reﬂects the domain such as these customers know it, and software that is correct with respect to requirements, with proofs of correctness often having to refer to the domain. But computing scientists are shown, in these papers, that domain science and engineering is a ﬁeld full of interesting problems to be researched.
We consider domain descriptions, requirements prescriptions and software design speciﬁcations to be mathematical quantities.
Computers are man-made, they are artefacts. Physicists and engineers compute over domains of physics, including chemistry, and engineering designs, and their computations range mostly over phenomena of physics. Manufacturing, logistics and transport ﬁrms as well as goods importers/exporters, wholesalers and retail ﬁrms use computers signiﬁcantly. Their domain is mostly operations research. With domain
1 cf. ‘Engineering’ in the main title and the second subtitle of this monograph 2 We use the ampersand ‘&’ to emphasize that domain science & engineering is one topic, not two. 3 cf. ‘Science’ in the main title and the ﬁrst subtitle of this monograph
science & engineering the domain (of possible software applications) is now deﬁnable in terms of what the method of this monograph is capable of handling. Brieﬂy, but by far not exhaustively, that domain includes such which focus on man-made objects, i.e., on artefacts, and the interaction of humans with these. In that respect the domain science & engineering, when used for the purposes of software development, straddles the aforementioned application areas but now, we claim, with some ﬁrm direction.
The state of this monograph reﬂects that it is ‘work in progress’. The ﬁrst publication directing the method in the direction of what is presented here were [53, 57, Summer 2010]. Since then there has been several publications in peer reviewed journals [70, 76, 74, 78, Years 2017–2019]. In the period of submission of the most recent of these [78, Spring 2018], and during the writing of this monograph, up to this very moment this Preface is being written, new research discoveries are made. The way that these new research ideas ﬁts well within the framework, also in its detailed aspects, makes me think that the body of work presented here is stable and durable. I have therefore decided to release the monograph now in the hope that it might inspire others to continue the research.
The Monograph as a Textbook
Many universities appears to teach their science students, whether BSc or MSc, only such material for which there exists generally accepted and stable theories. I have over the years, since 1976, when I ﬁrst joined a university staff — then as a full professor — mostly not adhered to this limitation, but taught, to BSc/MSc students, such material that yet had to reach the maturity of a scientiﬁc theory. So, go ahead, use this monograph in teaching !
This monograph is intended at the following mathematics–minded audiences:
primarily researchers, lecturers and PhD students in the sciences of computers and computing – conventionally speaking: those who have few preconceived objections to the use of discrete mathematics; hopefully also their similarly oriented curious and serious MSc students; and ﬁnally, recent, and not so recent, practicing software engineers and programmers – again openminded with respect to new foundations for programming and formalisms.
At the end of most chapters’ ‘Problem Exercise’ sections, we suggest a number of anywhere from engineering to science challenges: project-oriented domain analysis & description class-project exercises as well as more individual research problems of more-or-less “standard” degree of difﬁculty to plain challenging studies. The class-project exercises amount to rather “full-scale” 4–6 student term projects.
This is a monograph of 11 chapters. Except for three (Chapters 0, 2 and 10), these chapters build on the following publications:
Chapter 1: Philosophy [77] 11–16 Chapter 3: External Qualities [78, Sects. 2–3]4 39–84 Chapter 4: Internal Qualities [78, Sect. 4] 85–123 Chapter 5: Transcendental Deduction [78, Sects. 5–6] and [77] 125–126
4 [70] is a precursor for [78]
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41
Chapter 6: Perdurants [78, Sect. 7] 127–163 Chapter 7: Domain Facets [75, 52] 165–195 Chapter 8: Requirements [66, 44] 199–244 Chapter 9: Demos, Simulators, Monitors and Controllers [58] 247–255
Chapters 0–2 paves the way. They introduce the reader to a vocabulary of concepts speciﬁc to computing science; to some fundamental ideas of philosophy – a new to any treatise of our ﬁeld; and to prerequisite concepts of discrete mathematics, of space, time and matter, and of unique identiﬁcation and mereology – also new to any treatise of our ﬁeld. Chapters 3–6 form the real core of this monograph. It is here we develop what we shall, unashamedly, refer to as both a science and an engineering, i.e., a methodology for understanding the concept of ‘domains’ such as we shall deﬁne it. These chapters study and develop calculi for the analysis of domains and for their description. At the same time as presenting this study these chapters also present a method for actually developing domain descriptions. This duality, the beginnings of a scientiﬁc, theoretical foundation for domain analyser & describer, and the beginnings of a method for actual engineering development, may seem confusing if the twin aspects are not kept clear from one another. We have endeavoured to present the two aspects reasonable separated. Chapters 7–9 are “bonus” chapters ! They contain some quite original concepts: domain facets (Chapter7) such as intrinsics, support technology, rules & regulations, scripts, license languages, management & organisation and human behaviour; requirements engineering (Chapter 8) concepts such as the distinction into domain requirements, interfaces requirements and machine requirements, projection, instantiation, determination, extension and ﬁtting, and more – not quite the way conventional requirements engineering textbooks treat the ﬁeld; and demos, simulators, monitors and controllers (Chapter9) are all concepts that, we claim, can be interestingly understood in light of domain descriptions being developed into requirements prescriptions and these into software designs and software. These chapters may, for better or worse, not be of interest to some computer scientists, but should be of interest to software engineering practitioners and people who do study the more mundane aspects of software engineering.
This monograph uses the RAISE Speciﬁcation Language, RSL [179, 176] for its formal presentations and for its mixed mathematical notation and RSL informal explanations. We refer to Appendix C for a r´esum´e of RSL. [177, 168, 172] provide short, concise introductions to the RAISE Method and to RSL. Equally relevant other speciﬁcation languages could be VDM SL [88, 89, 154], Z [374], the B Method notation [1], Alloy [251], and others. Also algebraic approaches are possible, for example: CafeOBJ [157], CASL [128] or Maude [283, 126]. Lecturer and students, readers in general, perhaps more familiar with some of the above languages than with RSL, should be able to follow our presentations, but perform their exercise/term project work in the language of their choice. This monograph is the ﬁrst in which domain science & engineering is presented in a coherent form, ready for scientiﬁc study as well as for university classes. But it is far from a polished textbook: Not all “corners” of describable, manifest and artefactual domains are here given “all the necessary” principles, techniques and [language] tools necessary for “run-of-the-mill” software development. We have given sufﬁciently many university courses, over previous texts, and these have shown, we claim, that most students can be expected, under guidance of professionals experienced in formal speciﬁcations, to contribute meaningfully to professional domain analysis & description projects. We have left out of this monograph potential chapters on for example: possible Semantic Models of the domain analysis & description calculi [62]. We invite the reader to study this reference as well as to contribute to domain science. Examples of the latter could, for example, entail: A Study of Analysis & Description Calculi: on the order of analysis & description prompts; on the top-down analysis & description, as suitable, for artefactual domains versus bottom-down analyses & descriptions, as perhaps more suitable, for natural and living speciﬁc domains, including humans; a deeper understanding of Intentional Pull, et cetera.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark

VIII
This is most likely the last book that I may be able to publish. Over the years I have co-edited, edited, co-authored or authored a number of published books. Some more note-worthy are: [88, 32, 92, 89, 33, 83, 19, 90, 39, 40, 41, 79, 45, 46, 47, 49, 50, 51]. Over all these years I have beneﬁted in my research from a large number of wonderful people. I bear tribute, in approximate chronological order, to a few of these: (the late) Cai Kinberg, Gunnar Wedell, (the late) Jean Paul Jacob, Peter Johansen, Ivan Havel, Leif Saalbach Andersen, (the late) Gerald Weinberg, (the late) LotﬁZadeh, (the late) E.F. Codd, (the late) John W. Backus, (the late) Peter Lucas, Cliff Jones, (the late) Hans Bekiˇc, Kurt Walk, (the late) Christian Gram, Hans Bruun, (the late) Asger Kjerbye Nielsen, Andrzej Blikle, D¨om¨olki Balint, Jozef Gruska, Erich Neuhold, Ole N. Oest, (the late) Søren Prehn, Michael A. Jackson, Sir Tony Hoare, Hans Langmaack, Ronan Nugent, Larry E. Druffel, Enn S. Tyugu, Olivier Danvy, Dominique M´ery, Jorge Cuellar, Zhou Chao Chen, Kokichi Futatsugi, Chris George, Tetsuo Tamai and Klaus Havelund. I also wish to thank the many colleagues around the world who have let me try out the ideas of earlier versions of this monograph on their students in MSc/PhD courses since my retirement, at age 70, in 2007: Egon B¨orger (Pisa), Dominique M´ery (Nancy), Wolfgang J. Paul (Saarbr¨ucken), Alan Bundy (Edinburgh), Tetsuo Tamai (Tokyo), D¨om¨olki Balint (Budapest), Andreas Hamfeldt (Uppsala), Luıs Barbosa (Braga), Jin Song Dong (Singapore), Jens Knoop (Vienna), Magne Haveraaen (Bergen), Zhu Huibiao (Shanghai) and Chin Wei Ngan (Singapore). I ﬁnally wish to thank Kai Sørlander for his Philosophy [345, 346, 347, 348]. As you shall ﬁnd out, Sørlander’s Philosophy has inspired me tremendously. Ideas that were previously vague, are now, to me, clear. I hope you will be likewise enlightened.
Dines Bjørner. August 16, 2020: 11:41 am Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

SETTING THE SCOPE
The ﬁrst three chapters: 0, 1 and 2, provide a personal, intellectual introduction to the ﬁeld of software engineering. In Chapter 0 I introduce “my” Concepts. These are brieﬂy characterised. These characterisations can be found in ordinary dictionaries and on Wikipedia. It is their juxtaposition, here in the beginning of this monograph, that, to me is signiﬁcant and personal. They have formed and form a terminological foundation upon which I have built in the last 40 or more years. In Chapter 1 I summarize essential aspects of Kai Sørlanders Philosophy5. Kai Sørlanders Philosophy, such as I use it, is covered in four of his monographs: [345, 346, 347, 348]. It is thought that this introduction of a philosophical basis for the computer & computing sciences is novel! In Chapter 2 we bring three fundamental concepts: Space, Time and Matter together. They are all inherent in Kai Sørlander’s Philosophy. I then explore aspects of Identity and Mereology – and refer to the published [76]. Chapter0 is basically “armchair reading”! Chapters 1 and 2 require a rather more serious study !

5 I spell that with a capital P in order to name a speciﬁc philosophy

CONCEPTS
This monograph introduces a rather large number of new concepts. In a conventional software engineering setting, and, as in this case, in a technical/scientiﬁc monograph, such an introduction is unusual. I present this chapter because of the large number of new concepts. In order for the reader to ﬁnd the way around, that reader must be made aware of the background concepts that underlie my treatment of a new branch of software engineering, the domain science and engineering.

0.1 A General Vocabulary
Conception, my boy, fundamental brain-work, is what makes the difference in all art D.G. Rossetti1: letter to H. Caine2
Abstraction is a tool, used by the human mind, and to be applied in the process of describing (understanding) complex phenomena. Abstraction is the most powerful such tool available to the human intellect. Science proceeds by simplifying reality. The ﬁrst step in simpliﬁcation is abstraction. Abstraction (in the context of science) means leaving out of account all those empirical data which do not ﬁt the particular, conceptual framework within which science at the moment happens to be working. Abstraction (in the process of speciﬁcation) arises from a conscious decision to advocate certain desired objects, situations and processes as being fundamental; by exposing, in a ﬁrst, or higher, level of description, their similarities and — at that level — ignoring possible differences. [From the opening paragraphs of [236, C.A.R. Hoare Notes on Data Structuring]]3
2 Computer: A computer is a collection of hardware and software, that is, is a machine that can be instructed to carry out sequences of arithmetic or logical operations automatically via computer programming [Wikipedia].
3 Computer Science: is the study and knowledge of the abstract phenomena that “occur” within computers [DB]. As such computer science includes theory of computation, automata theory, formal language theory, algorithmic complexity theory, probabilistic computation, quantum computation, cryptography, machine learning and computational biology..
1 Dante Gabrielli Rosetti, 1828–1882, English poet, illustrator, painter and translator 2 T. Hall Caine, 1853–1931, British novelist, dramatist, short story writer, poet and critic. 3 We shall bring another quote of Tony Hoare as the last proper text of this monograph, see Sect. 10.8 on Page 261.

0 CONCEPTS
4 Computing Science: is the study and knowledge of how to construct “those things” that “occur” within computers [DB]. As such computing science embodies algorithm and data structure design, functional-, logic-, imperativeand parallel programming; code testing, model checking and speciﬁcation proofs. Much of this can be pursued using formal methods (see Item 9).
5 Domain Engineering: is the engineering of domain descriptions based on the engineering of domain analyses [DB]. Chapters 3–7 covers domain engineering. We shall later, in Chapter10, summarise the “beneﬁts” of domain engineering. Sufﬁce it here to say that basing software development on domain analysis & description shall help secure that the eventually emerging software meets customer expectations.
6 Domain Requirements: are those requirements which can be expressed sˆolely in terms of domain concepts.
7 Engineering: is the use of scientiﬁc principles to design and build machines, structures, and other items, including bridges, tunnels, roads, vehicles, and buildings [Wikipedia]. The engineer walks the bridge between science and technology: analysing man-made devices for their possible scientiﬁc properties and constructing technology based on scientiﬁc insight. We refer to [[ι 5,π 4]], [[ι 27,π 5]], [[ι 35,π 6]].
8 Epistemology: is the branch of philosophy concerned with the theory of knowledge – and is the study of the nature of knowledge, justiﬁcation, and the rationality of belief [Wikipedia].
9 Formal Method: By a formal method we shall here understand a method whose techniques and tools can be understood mathematically. For formal domain, requirements or software engineering methods formality means the following: There is a set, one or more, speciﬁcation languages – say for domain descriptions, requirements prescriptions, software speciﬁcations, and software coding, i.e., programming languages.4
These are all to be formal, that is, to have a formal syntax, a formal semantics, and a formal, typically Mathematical Logic proof system. Some of the techniques and tools must be supported by a mathematical understanding.
10 Hardware: The physical components of a computer: electronics, mechanics, etc. [Wikipedia].
11 Interface Requirements: are those requirements which can be expressed in a combination of both domain and machine concepts. They do so because certain entities, whither endurants or perdurants, are shared between the domain and the machine.
12 Language: By language we shall, with [Wikipedia], mean a structured system of communication. Language, in a broader sense, is the method of communication that involves the use of – particularly human– languages. The ‘structured system’ that we refer to has come to be known as Syntax, Semantics and Pragmatics. We refer to [[ι 37,π 7]]5, [[ι 31,π 6]], and [[ι 25,π 5]].
13 Linguistics: By linguistics we shall mean the scientiﬁc study of language.
14 Machine: By a machine we shall understand a combination of software and hardware.
15 Machine Requirements: are those requirements which can be expressed sˆolely in terms of machine concepts.
16 Mathematics: By mathematics we shall here understand a such human endeavours that makes precise certain facets of language, [[ι 12,π 4]] whether natural or ‘constructed’ (as for mathematical notation), and out of those endeavours, i.e., mathematical constructions, also called theories, build further abstractions. We refer to Sects. 2.2 on Page 17– 2.3 on Page 17.
4 Most formal speciﬁcation languages are textual, but graphical languages like Petri nets [333], Message Sequence Charts[249], Statecharts [199], Live Sequence Charts [200], etc., are also formal. 5 By [[ι 37,π 7]] we mean to refer to ιtem 37 πage 7
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

0.1 A General Vocabulary
17 Metaphysics: is the branch of philosophy that examines the fundamental nature of reality, including the relationship between mind and matter, between substance and attribute, and between potentiality and actuality [269] [Wikipedia]. In this monograph we stay clear of metaphysics.
18 Mereology: is the theory of parthood relations: of the relations of part to whole and the relations of part to part within a whole [358, 344, 115]. The term ‘mereology’ is accredited to the Polish mathematician, philosopher and logician Stanisław Le´sniewski (1886–1939).

19 Method: By a method we shall understand a set of principles for selecting and applying a set of
techniques using a set of tools in order to construct an artefact [DB]. We shall in this primer focus on a method for pursuing domain analysis and for constructing domain descriptions. Key chapters will summarise some methodological aspects of their content.
20 Methodology: is the comparative study and knowledge of methods [DB]. [The two terms: ’method’ and ’methodology’ are often confused, including used interchangeably.]
21 Model: A mathematical model is a description of a system using mathematical concepts and language. We shall include descriptions6, prescriptions7 and speciﬁcations8 using formal languages as presenting models.
22 Modelling: Modelling is the act of creating models, which include discrete mathematical structures (sets, Cartesians, lists, maps, etc.), and are logical theories represented as algebras. That is, any given RSL text denotes a set of models, and each model is an algebra, i.e., a set of named values and a set of named operations on these. Modelling is the engineering activity of establishing, analysing and using such structures and theories. Our models are established with the intention that they “model” “something else” other than just being the mathematical structure or theory itself. That “something else” is, in our case, some part of a reality9, or of a construed such reality, or of requirements to the, or a reality10, or of actual software11.
23 Ontology: is the branch of metaphysics dealing with the nature of being; a set of concepts and categories in a subject area or domain that shows their properties and the relations between them [108, 109] [Wikipedia]. In this monograph we shall, indeed, focus much on the ontology of domains. See, f.ex., Chapter 4.
24 Philosophy: is the study of general and fundamental questions about existence, knowledge, values, reason, mind, and language. Such questions are often posed as problems to be studied or resolved [Wikipedia].
25 Pragmatics: studies the ways in which context contributes to meaning. Pragmatics encompasses speech act theory, conversational implicature, talk in interaction and other approaches to language behavior in philosophy, sociology, linguistics and anthropology [304, 288] [Wikipedia].
26 Requirements: By a requirements we understand (cf., [245, IEEE Standard 610.12]): “A condition or capability needed by a user to solve a problem or achieve an objective” In software development the requirements explain what properties the desired software should have, not how these properties might be attained. In our, the triptych approach, requirements are to be “derived” from domain descriptions.
27 Requirements Engineering: is the engineering of constructing requirements [DB].
6 as for domains 7 as for requirements 8 as for software 9 — as in domain modelling 10 — as in requirements modelling 11 — as in software design
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark

0 CONCEPTS
The aim of requirements engineering is to design the machine. Chapter 8 covers requirements engineering.
28 Requirements Prescription: By a requirements prescription we mean a document which outlines the requirements that some software is expected to fulﬁll.
29 Requirements Speciﬁcation: By a requirements speciﬁcation we mean the sames as a requirements prescription.
30 Science: is a systematic enterprise that builds and organizes knowledge in the form of testable explanations and predictions about the universe [Wikipedia]. Science is the intellectual and practical activity encompassing the systematic study of the structure and behaviour of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment.
31 Semantics: is the linguistic and philosophical study of meaning in language, programming languages, formal logics, and semiotics. It is concerned with the relationship between signiﬁers — like words, phrases, signs, and symbols — and what they stand for in reality, their denotation [112] [Wikipedia]. The languages that we shall be concerned with is, on one hand, the language[s] in which we describe domains [as here a variant of RSL, the RAISE Specification Language, extended, as we shall see in Chapters 3–6,] and, on the other hand, the language that emerges as the result of our domain analysis & description: a domain speciﬁc language. There are basically three kinds of semantics, expressed somewhat simplistically: Denotational Semantics model-theoretically assigns a meaning, a denotation, to each phrase structure, i.e., syntactic category. Axiomatic Semantics or Mathematical Logic Proof Systems is an approach based on mathematical logic for proving the correctness of speciﬁcations. Algebraic Semantics is a form of axiomatic semantics based on algebraic laws for describing and reasoning about program semantics in a formal manner.
32 Semiotics: is the study and knowledge of sign process (semiosis), which is any form of activity, conduct, or any process that involves signs, including the production of meaning [Wikipedia].A sign is anything that communicates a meaning, that is not the sign itself, to the interpreter of the sign. The meaning can be intentional such as a word uttered with a speciﬁc meaning, or unintentional, such as a symptom being a sign of a particular medical condition. Signs can communicate through any of the senses, visual, auditory, tactile, olfactory, or gustatory [Wikipedia]. The study and knowledge of semiotics is often “broken down” into the studies, etc., of syntax, semantics and pragmatics.
33 Software: is the is the set of all the documents that have resulted from a completed software development: domain analysis & description, requirements analysis & prescription, software: software code, software installation manuals, software maintenance manuals, software users guides, development project plans, budget, etc.
34 Software Design: is the engineering of constructing software [DB]. Whereas software requirements engineering focus on the logical properties that desired software should attain, software design, besides focusing on achieving these properties correctly, also focus on the properties being achieved efﬁciently.
35 Software Engineering: to us, is then the combination of domain and requirements engineering with software design [DB]. This is my characterisation of software engineering. It is at the basis of this monograph as well as [39, 40, 41].
36 Software Development: is then the combination of the development of domain description, requirements prescription and software design [DB]. This is my characterisation of software engineering. It is at the basis of this monograph as well as [39, 40, 41].
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

0.2 More on Method
37 Syntax: is the set of rules, principles, and processes that govern the structure of sentences (sentence structure) in a given language, usually including word order [Wikipedia].
We assume, as an absolute minimum of knowledge, that the reader of this primer is well aware of the concepts of BNF (Backus Normal Form) Grammars and CFGs (Context Free Grammars).
38 Syntax, Semantics and Pragmatics: With the advent of computing and their attendant programming languages these concepts of semiotics has taken on a somewhat additional meaning. When, in computer & computing science and in software engineering we speak of syntax we mean a quite deﬁnite and (mathematically) precise thing. With the advent our ability to mathematically precise describe the semantics of [certain] programming languages, we similarly mean quite deﬁnite and (mathematically) precise things. For natural, i.e., human languages, this is not so. As for pragmatics there is this to say. Computers have not pragmatics. Humans have. When, in this monograph we bring the term ‘pragmatics’ into play we are referring not to the computer “being pragmatic”, but to our pragmatics, as scientists, as engineers.
39 Taxonomy: is the practice and science of classiﬁcation of things or concepts, including the principles that underlie such classiﬁcation [Wikipedia]. We shall be basing our domain analysis initially on taxonomy ideas, cf. Chapter 3.
40 Technology: is the sum of techniques, skills, methods, and processes used in the production of goods or services or in the accomplishment of objectives, such as scientiﬁc investigation [Wikipedia]. Technology can be the knowledge of techniques, processes, and the like, or it can be embedded in machines to allow for operation without detailed knowledge of their workings. Systems (e.g. machines) applying technology by taking an input, changing it according to the system’s use, and then producing an outcome are referred to as technology systems or technological systems [Wikipedia].
41 Triptych: The triptych [of software development] centers on the three ‘engineerings’: domain, requirements and software [DB]. We refer to The Triptych Dogma of Page V.

0.2 More on Method
We elaborate on issues arising from the concept of ‘method’. These are brought here in some, hopefully meaningful, but not alphabetic order!

42 Method: By a method we shall understand a set of principles for selecting and applying a set of
techniques using a set of tools in order to construct an artefact [DB]. 43 Principle: By a principle we shall, loosely, understand (i) elemental aspect of a craft or discipline, (ii) foundation, (iii) general law of nature, etc [www.etymonline.com]. 44 Technique: By a technique we shall, loosely, understand (i) formal practical details in artistic, etc., expression, (ii) art, skill, craft in work” [www.etymonline.com]. Classical technique are that of establishing invariants and expressing intentional pull. See Item 50 on the following page and Item 49 on the next page. 45 Tool: By a tool we shall, loosely, understand (i) instrument, implement used by a craftsman or laborer, weapon, (ii) that with which one prepares something, etc. [www.etymonline.com]. We shall, at the end of several chapters12 summarise the principles, techniques and tools covered by these chapters.
Among basic principles, to be applied across all phases of software development, and hence in all phased of software engineering are those of:
46 Abstraction: We refer to Item 1 on Page 3. 47 Conservative Extension: An extension of a logical theory is conservative, i.e., conserves, if every theorem expressible in the original theory is also derivable within the original theory [en.wiktionary.org/wiki/conservative extension].
12 See Sects. 3.21.3 on Page 79, 4.10.3 on Page 120, 6.13.1 on Page 160, 7.9.1 on Page 192, 8.7.1 on Page 240
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark

0 CONCEPTS
48 Divide and Conquer: In computer science, divide and conquer is an algorithm design paradigm based on multi-branched recursion. A divide-and-conquer algorithm works by recursively breaking down a problem into two or more sub-problems of the same or related type, until these become simple enough to be solved directly [Wikipedia]. But this monograph is not about the exciting ﬁeld of algorithm design. Yet, the principle of divide and conquer is also very strongly at play here: In the top-down analysis of a domain into what can be described and what is indescribable, of describable entities into endurants and perdurants, of endurants into discrete, conjoins and materials, of discrete into physical parts, structures and living species, and so forth [cf. Fig. 3.1 on Page 44]. 49 Intentional Pull: The concept of intentional pull is a wider notion than that of invariant. Here we are not concerned with pre-/post-conditions on operations. Intentional pull is exerted between two or more phenomena of a domain when their relation can be asserted to always hold. 50 Invariants: The concept of invariants in the context of computing science is most clearly illustrated in connection with the well-formedness of data structures. Invariants then express properties that must hold, i.e., as a pre-condition, before any application of an operation to those data structures and shall hold, i.e. as a post-condition after any application of an operation to those data structures. 51 Narration & Formalisation: To communicate what a domain “is”, one must be able to narrate of what it consists. To understand a domain one must give a formal description of that domain. When we put an ampersand, &, between the two terms we mean to say that they form a whole: not one without the other, either way around ! In our domain descriptions we enumerate narrative sentences and ascribe this enumeration to formal expressions. 52 Nondeterminism: Non-determinism is a fundamental concept in computer science. It appears in various contexts such as automata theory, algorithms and concurrent computation. ...The concept was developed from its inception by Rabin & Scott, Floyd and Dijkstra; as was the interplay between non-determinism and concurrency [Michal Armoni and Mordechai Ben-Ari]. 53 Operational Abstraction abstract the way in which we express operations on usually representationally abstracted values. In conventional programming we refer to operational abstract as procedure abstraction. 54 Reﬁnement is a veriﬁable transformation of an abstract (i.e., high-level) formal speciﬁcation into a less abstract, we say more concrete (i.e., low-level) speciﬁcation or an executable program. Step-wise reﬁnement allows the reﬁnement of a program, from a speciﬁcation, to be done in stages [www.igi-global.com/dictionary]. 55 Representational Abstraction abstracts the representation of type values, say in the form of just plain sorts, or, when concrete types, then in, for example the form of mathematical sets, or maps (i.e., discrete functions, usually from ﬁnite deﬁnition sets into likewise representationally abstracted ranges), or Cartesians (i.e., groupings of likewise abstracted elements), etc. In conventional programming we refer to representational abstract as data abstraction.

56 Syntax and Semantics: When we write:
We mean that the [free] a in the B(a) clause is bound to the value a of type A in let a:A.
57 Syntax Names: To express that we refer to the syntactic name of a sort or type, A, we write:
That is, ❝... ❞is a special, meta-linguistic distributed-ﬁx quote [unquote] operator. It is explained in Sect. 2.3.5.2 Page 22.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

0.3 Some More Personal Observations

0.3 Some More Personal Observations
Informatics: We understand informatics as a conﬂuence of mathematics, of the computer and computing sciences, of the domain science and engineering as espoused in this monograph, requirements engineering and software design. IT – Information Technology: We understand information technology as the conﬂuence of nano physics, electronics, computers and communication (hardware), sensors, actuators, etc. Two Universes: Two diverse universes appear to emerge: Information Technology is, to this author, a universe of both material quality and quantity. It is primarily materially characterised, such as I see it, by such terms as bigger, smaller; faster, slower; costly, inexpensive, and environment “friendly” Informatics is, to this author, a universe of intellectual quality. As such it is primarily characterised, such as I see it, by such terms as better, more ﬁt for purpose, appropriate, logically correct and meets user expectations.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark

PHILOSOPHY
In this chapter we cover notions of philosophy that we claim are fundamental to our understanding of domain science and engineering.
We shall base some of our domain analysis decisions on Kai Sørlander’s Philosophy [345, 346, 347, 348]. A main contribution of Kai Sørlander is, on the philosophical basis of the possibility of truth (in contrast to Kant’s possibility of self-awareness), to rationally and transcendentally deduce the absolutely necessary conditions for describing any world. These conditions presume a principle of contradiction and lead to the ability to reason using logical connectives and to handle asymmetry, symmetry and transitivity. Transcendental deductions then lead to space and time, not as priory assumptions, as with Kant, but derived facts of any world. From this basis Kai Sørlander then, by further transcendental deductions, arrive at kinematics, dynamics and the bases for Newton’s Laws. We build on Sørlander’s basis to argue that the domain analysis & description calculi are necessary and sufﬁcient for the analysis & description of domains and that a number of relations between domain entities can be understood transcendentally and as “variants” of laws of physics, biology, etc. !

1.1 Some Issues of Philosophy
The question is: “what, if anything, is of such necessity, that it could under no circumstances be otherwise?” or “which are the necessary characteristics of any possible world ?”. We take it that the necessary characteristics of any domain is equivalent with the conceptual, logical conditions for any possible description of that domain. Sørlander puts forward the thesis of the possibility of truth and then, basing transcendental deductions on indisputable logical relations, arrives at the conceptual, logical conditions for any possible description of any domain. The starting point, now, in a series of deductions, is that of logic and that we can assert a property, P, and its negation ¬P. These two assertions cannot both be true, that is, that P ∧¬P cannot be true. So the possibility of truth is a universally valid condition. When we claim that, we also claim the contradiction principle. The implicit meaning theory is this: “in assertions there are mutual dependencies between the meaning of designations and consistency relation between assertions”. When we claim that a philosophy basis is that of the possibility of truth, then we assume that this basis include the contradiction principle and the implicit meaning theory. We shall also refer to the implicit meaning theory as the inescapable meaning assignment. As an example of what “goes into” the inescapable meaning assignment, we bring, albeit from the world of computer science, that of the description of the stack data type (its endurants and operations).
Inescapable Meaning Assignment, Narrative
Example 1 The meaning of designations:
58 Stacks, s:S, have elements, e:E; 59 the empty S operation takes no arguments and yields a result stack; 60 the is empty S operation takes an argument stack and yields a Boolean value result. 61 the stack operation takes two arguments: an element and a stack and yields a result stack. 62 the unstack operation takes an non-empty argument stack and yields a stack result. 63 the top operation takes an non-empty argument stack and yields an element result.

1 PHILOSOPHY
64 an empty S stack is empty, and a stack with at least one element is not; 65 unstacking an argument stack, stack(e,s), results in the stack s; and 66 inquiring the top of a non-empty argument stack, stack(e,s), yields e.
Inescapable Meaning Assignment, Formalisation
The meaning of designations:
is empty(empty S()) = true is empty(stack(e,s)) = false unstack(stack(e,s)) = s top(stack(e,s)) = e
type E, S value empty S: Unit →S is empty S: S →Bool stack: E × S →S unstack: S ∼

1.2 Transcendence
Deﬁnition: 1 Transcendental, I: By transcendental we shall understand the philosophical notion: the a priori or intuitive basis of knowledge, independent of experience
Deﬁnition: 2 Transcendental Deduction, I: By a transcendental deduction we shall understand the philosophical notion: a transcendental ‘conversion’of one kind of knowledge into a seemingly different kind of knowledge
Transcendental philosophy, with Kant and Sørlander, seeks to ﬁnd the necessary conditions for experience, recognition and understanding. Transcendental deduction is then the “process”, based on the principle of contradiction and the implicit meaning theory, by means of which – through successive concept deﬁnitions – one can deduce a system of base concepts which must be assumed in any possible description of the world. The subsequent developments of the logical connectives, modalities, existence, identity, difference, relations, numbers, space, time and causality, are all transcendental deductions. We shall return to the notions of transcendence in Chapter5.

1.3 Overview of The Sørlander Philosophy
In this section we shall give a very terse summary of main elements of Kai Sørlander’s philosophy. We shall primarily base this overview on [348]. It is necessarily a terse summary. What we overview is developed in [348] over some 50 pages. Sørlander’s books [345, 346, 347, 348], relevant to this overview, are all in Danish. Hence the need for this section.

1.3.1 Logical Connectives
The logical connective, negation (¬), is deﬁned as follows: if assertion P holds then assertion ¬P does not hold. That is, the contradiction principle understood as a deﬁnition of the concept of negation.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

1.3 Overview of The Sørlander Philosophy
1.3.1.2 Conjunction and Disjunction: ∧and ∨
Assertion P ∧Q holds, i.e., is true, if both P and Q holds. Assertion P ∨Q holds, i.e., is true, if either P or Q or both P and Q holds.
Assertion P ⇒Q holds, i.e., is true, if the ﬁrst assertion, P, holds, t, and the second assertion, Q, is not false, ¬f.[(P,Q),P ⇒Q]: [(t,t),t], [(t,f),f], [(f,t),t], and [(f,f),t]. ⇒used in logic is also called material implication.
1.3.2 Towards a Philosophy–basis for Physics and Biology
In a somewhat long series of deductions we shall, based on Sørlander’s Philosophy, motivate the laws of Newton and more, not on the basis of empirical observations, but on the basis of transcendental deductions and rational reasoning.

1.3.2.1 Possibility and Necessity
Based on logical implication we can transcendentally deﬁne the two modal operators: necessity and possibility.
Deﬁnition: 3 Necessarily True Assertions: An assertion is necessarily true if its truth follows from the deﬁnition of the designations by means of which it is expressed
Deﬁnition: 4 Possibly True Assertions: An assertion is possibly true if its negation is not necessary

1.3.2.2 Empirical Assertions
There can be assertions whose truth value does not only depend on the deﬁnition of the designations by means of which they are expressed. Those are assertions whose truth value depend also on the assertions referring to something that exists independently of the designations by means of which they are expressed. We shall call such assertions empirical.

1.3.2.3 Existence of Entities
With Sørlander we shall now argue that there exist many entities in any world: [348, pp 145] “Entities, in a ﬁrst step of reasoning, that can be referred to in empirical assertions, do not necessarily exist. It is, however, an empirical fact that they do exist; hence there is a logical necessity that they do not exist1. In a second step of reasoning, these entities must exist as a necessary condition for their actually being ascribed the predicates which they must necessarily beﬁt in their capacity of of being entities referred to in empirical assertions.”
1 Here we need to emphasize that the above quote from Sørlander is one between the type and a value of that type. So the empirical assertions motivate that we speak of the type of an entity. Empirical facts then states that some speciﬁc value of that type need not exist. In fact, there is, most likely, an indeﬁnite number of values of the asserted type that do not exist.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark

1 PHILOSOPHY
1.3.2.4 Identity, Difference and Relations
[348, pp 146] “An entity, referred to by A, is identical to an entity, referred to by B, if A cannot be ascribed a predicate in-commensurable with a predicate ascribed to B.” That is, if A and B cannot be ascribed incommensurable predicates. [348, pp 146] “Entities A and B are different if they can be ascribed incommensurable predicates.” [348, pp 147] “Identity and difference are thus transcendentally derived through these formal deﬁnitions and must therefore be presupposed in any description of any domain and must be expressible in any language.” Identity and difference are relations. [348, pp 147] “As a consequence identity and difference imply relations. Symmetry and asymmetry are also relations: A identical to B is the same as B identical to A. And A different from B is the same as B different from A. Finally transitivity follows from A identical to B and B identical to C implies A identical to C.”

1.3.2.5 Sets
We can, as a consequence of two or more different entities satisfying a same predicate, say P, deﬁne the notion of the set of all those entities satisfying P. And, as a consequence of two or more entities, ei,...,ej, all being distinct, therefore implying in-commensurable predicates, Qi,...,Qj, but still satisfying a common predicate, P, we can claim that they all belong to a same set. The predicate P can be said to type that set. And so forth: following this line of reasoning we can introduce notions of cardinality of sets, ﬁnite and inﬁnite sets, existential (∃) and universal (∀) quantiﬁers, etc.; and we can in this way transcendentally deduce the concept of (positive) numbers, their addition and multiplication; and that such are an indispensable aspect of any domain. We leave it then to mathematics to study number theory.

1.3.2.6 Space and Geometry
Deﬁnition: 5 Space: [348, pp 154] “The two relations asymmetric and symmetric, by a transcendental deduction, can be given an interpretation: the relation (spatial) direction is asymmetric; and the relation (spatial) distance is symmetric. Direction and distance can be understood as spatial relations. From these relations are derived the relation in-between. Hence we must conclude that primary entities exist in space. Space is therefore an unavoidable characteristic of any possible world”
[348, pp 155] “Entities, to which reference can be made in simple, empirical assertions, must exist in space; they must be spatial, i.e., have a certain extension in all directions; they must therefore “ﬁll up some space”, have surface and form.” From this, by further reasoning one can develop notions of points, line, surface, etc., i.e., Euclidean as well as non-Euclidean geometry. We refer to Sects. 2.4 on Page 22 and 2.4.4 on Page 23 for more on space.

1.3.2.7 States
We introduce a notion of state. [348, pp 158–159] “Entities may be ascribed predicates which it is not logically necessary that they are ascribed. How can that be possible ? Only if we accept that entities may be ascribed predicates which are in-commensurable with predicates that they are actually ascribed.” That is possible, we must conclude, if entities can exist in distinct states. We shall let this notion of state further undeﬁned – till Sect. 3.18.

1.3.2.8 Time and Causality
Deﬁnition: 6 Time: [348, pp 159] “Two different states must necessarily be ascribed different incompatible predicates. But how can we ensure so ? Only if states stand in an asymmetric relation to one another. This state relation is also transitive. So that is an indispensable property of any world. By a transcendental deduction we say that primary entities exist in time. So every possible world must exist in time”
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

1.4 From Philosophy to Physics and Biology
We refer to Sect. 2.5 on Page 24 for more on time. So space and time are not phenomena, i.e., are not entities. They are, by transcendental reasoning, aspects of any possible world, hence, of any description of any domain. In a concentrated series [348, 160-163] of logical reasoning and transcendental deductions, Sørlander, introduce the concepts of the empirical circumstances under which entities exist, implying non-logical implication between one-andthe-same entity at distinct times, leading to the notions of causal effect and causal implication – all deduced transcendentally. Whereas Kant’s causal implication is transcendentally deduced as necessary for the possibility of self-awareness. Sørlander’s causal implication does not assume possibility of selfawareness. The principle of causality is a necessary condition for assertions being about the same entity at different times.

1.3.2.9 Kinematics
[348, pp 164] “Entities are in both space and time; therefore it must be assumed that they can change their spatial properties; that is, are subject to movement. An entity which changes location is said to move. An entity which does not change location is said to be at rest.” In this way [348] transcendentally introduces the notions of velocity and acceleration, hence kinematics.

1.3.2.10 Dynamics
[348, pp 166] “When combining the causality principle with dynamics we deduce that when an entity changes its state of movement then there must be a cause, and we call that cause a force.” [348, pp 166] “The change of state of entity movement must be proportional to the applied force; an entity not subject to an external force will remain in its state of movement: This is Newton’s 1st Law.” [348, pp 166] “But to change an entity’s state of movement, by some force, must imply that the entity exerts a certain resistance to that change; the entity must have a mass. Changes in an entity’s state of movement besides being proportional to the external force, must be inverse proportional to its mass. This is Newton’s 2nd Law.” [348, pp 166-167] “The forces that act upon entities must have as source other entities: entities may collide; and when they collide the forces they exert on each other must be the same but with opposite directions. This is Newton’s 3rd Law.” [348, pp 167-168] “How can entities be the source of forces ? How can they have a mass ? Transcendentally it must follow from what we shall refer to as gravitational pull. Across all entities of mass, there is a mutual attraction, Universal Gravitation.” [348, pp 168-169] “Gravitation must, since it has its origin in the individual entities, propagate with a deﬁnite velocity; and that velocity must have a limit, a constant of nature, the universal speed limit.”

1.4 From Philosophy to Physics and Biology
Based on logical reasoning and transcendental deductions one can thus derive major aspects of that which must be (assumed to be) in any description of any world, i.e., domain. In our domain description ontology we shall let the notions of discrete endurants (parts) and continuous endurants (non-solids) cover what we have covered so far: they are those entities which satisfy the laws of physics, hence are in space and time. In the next sections we shall make further use of Sørlander’s Philosophy to logically and transcendentally justify the inevitability of living species: plants and animals including, notably, humans, in any description of any domain.
1.4.0.1 Purpose, Life and Evolution
[348, pp 174] “For language and meaning to be possible there must exist entities that are not constrained to just the laws of physics. This is possible if such entities are further subject to a “purpose-causality”
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark

1 PHILOSOPHY
directed at the future. These entities must strive to maintain their own existence.” We shall call such entities living species. Living species must maintain and also further develop their form and do so by an exchange of materials with the surroundings, i.e., metabolism, with one kind of living species subject only to development, form and metabolism, while another kind additionally move purposefully, The ﬁrst we call plants, the second animals. Animals, consistent with the principle of causality, must possess sensory organs, a motion apparatus, and instincts, feelings, promptings so that what has been sensed, may be responded to [through motion]. The purpose-directness of animals must be built into the animals. Biology shows that that is the case. The animal genomes appear to serve the purposedirectness of animals. [348, pp 178] “Biology shows that it is so; transcendental deduction that it must be so.”
1.4.0.2 Awareness, Learning and Language
[348, pp 180] “Animals, to learn from experience, must be able to feel inclination and disinclination, and must be able to remember that it has acted in some way leading to either the feeling of inclination or disinclination. As a consequence, an animal, if when acting in response to sense impression, ι, experiences the positive feeling of inclination (desire), then it will respond likewise when again receiving sense impression ι, until it is no longer so inclined. If, in contrast, the animal feels the negative feeling of disinclination (dislike), upon sense impression ι, then it will avoid responding in this manner when receiving sense impression ι.” [348, pp 181] “Awareness is built up from the sense impressions and feelings on the basis of, i.e., from what the individual animal has learned. Different animals can be expected to have different levels of consciousness; and different levels of consciousness assume different biological bases for learning. This is possible, biology tells us, because of there being a central nervous system with building blocks, the neurons, having an inner determination for learning and consciousness.” [348, pp 181–182] “In the mutual interaction between animals of a higher order of consciousness these animals learn to use signs developing increasingly complex sign systems, eventually “arriving” at languages.” It is thus we single out humans. [348, pp 183] “Any human language which can describe reality, must assume the full set of concepts that are prerequisites for any world description.”
1.5 Philosophy, Science and the Arts
We quote extensively from [346, Kai Sørlander, 1997]. [346, pp 178] “Philosophy, science and the arts are products of the human mind.” [346, pp 179] “Philosophy, science and the arts each have their own goals.
Philosophers seek to ﬁnd the inescapable characteristics of any world. Scientists seek to determine how the world actually, really is, and our situation in that world. Artists seek to create objects for experience.
We shall elaborate.” [346, pp 180] “Simplifying, but not without an element of truth, we can relate the three concepts by the modalities:
philosophy is the necessary, science is the real, and art is the possible.
... Here we have, then, a distinction between philosophy and science. ... From [345] we can conclude the following about the results of philosophy and science. These results must be consistent [with one another]. This is a necessary condition for their being correct. ... ... The real must be a concrete realisation of the necessary.”
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41
Logic and Mathematics SPACE, TIME and MATTER Identity and Mereology From Kai Sørlander’s Philosophy we can, by logical reasoning, infer space and time as facts. We do not have to presume them, as did Immanuel Kant. In this chapter we shall examine the concepts of space and time, as already introduced in the previous chapter, and introduce the concept of matter as more-or-less ex/implicitly referred to also in Kai Sørlander’s Philosophy.

2.1 Prologue
There are three main elements of this chapter. They are (i) An introduction to notions of language, logic and mathematics. (ii) The main elements on space, time and matter. They were already introduced in Chapter1. In the ﬁrst two of these we shall make use of notions of mathematical logic introduced earlier. (iii) Finally a cursory, i.e., an initial view of the notions of identity and mereology – also already introduced in that chapter, Chapter1. Identity and mereology will be core internal qualities of endurants – and dealt with in Sects. 4.2 and 4.3. Mereology will be further treated in AppendixB. Space can be logically reasoned to exist. So can time. Matter is implicit in Kai Sørlander’s Philosophy – in that the properties that can be expressed about entities include properties that, by transcendental deduction, entail matter: that which one can see and touch and those which can be [otherwise] “measured”, that is, that exist in space and satisfy laws of nature.

2.2 Logic
Deﬁnition: 7 Logic: By logic we shall here mean: the kind of reasoning that was shown in Chapter 1. It was based on the possibility of truth, and hence on the necessity of negation, from which was derived the logic operators conjunction and disjunction and, subsequently, as a result of the necessity of existence, identity and multiplicity of entities, the equality operator.
In this monograph we are indeed very much concerned with the logic of domains. Philosophical logic is the branch of study that concerns questions about reference, predication, identity, truth, quantiﬁcation, existence, entailment, modality, and necessity. Philosophical logic is includes the application of formal logical techniques to philosophical problems.

2.3 Mathematics
Mathematics has no generally accepted deﬁnition1. By mathematics we shall here, operationally2 mean the study and knowledge of algebra, calculus, combinatorics, geometry, graph theory, logic, whence mathematical logic, number theory, probability, set theory, statistics et cetera. – alphabetically listed !
1 Mathematics is what mathematicians do ! 2 – that is, in terms of the names of ﬁelds of mathematics
2 Logic and Mathematics SPACE, TIME and MATTER Identity and Mereology

2.3.1 Mathematical Logic
Deﬁnition: 8 Mathematical Logic: By mathematical logic we shall here mean: the study and knowledge of set theory, propositions, predicates, ﬁrst-order logic, deﬁnability, model theory, proof theory and recursion theory. – more-or-less arbitrarily listed !
Some basic notions of mathematical logic are: truth values: true, false, chaos3, ∼true, ∼false, true∧false, ∼true∧false, ...: ground terms: ∼a, a∧b, a∨b, a⇒b, a=b, a,b, a≡b (variables a, b, ... to range over truth values), propositions: true, false, ∼true, ∼false, true∧false, ∼true∧false, ..., a, b, ..., a∧true, a∧b, ...; and predicates: true, false, ∼true, ∼false, true∧false, ∼true∧false, ..., a, b, ..., a∧true, a∧b, ..., ∀x:X•true, ∀x:X•x∧..., ∃x:X•x∧... Three cornerstones of mathematical logic are: inference rules, axiom systems and proofs.
Deﬁnition: 9 Inference Rules: An inference rule consists of a list of one or more premises (predicates) and a conclusion (also a logical term):
This expression states that whenever in the course of some logical derivation the given premises, (p1, p2,..., pn), have been obtained, the speciﬁed conclusion, c, can be taken for granted as well
Deﬁnition: 10 Axioms and Axiom System: An axiom (or a postulate) is a statement that is taken to be true, to serve as a premise or starting point for further reasoning and arguments
An axiom system is a set of one or more axioms
We illustrate some axiom systems. Metric Space, Axiom System 1 on Page 24; J. van Benthem’s A Continuum Theory of Time, Axiom System 2 on Page 27; and Wayne D. Blizard’s A Theory of Time-Space, Axiom System 3 on Page 27. These are brought, not because we shall actually ‘use’ them, but to illustrate what axiom systems are.
Deﬁnition: 11 Proof: Proof, in logic, is an argument that establishes the validity of a proposition, p. The argument usually requires a sequence of proof steps, i, each, usually, refers to the steps in the argument that represents the premises, a proof rule, and the conclusion, c, which becomes a new step
Some related concepts of mathematical logic in software engineering are: interpretation, satisﬁability, validity and model.
Deﬁnition: 12 Interpretation: By an interpretation of a predicate we mean an assignment of a truth value to a predicate where the assignment may entail an assignment of values, in general, to the terms of the predicate
Deﬁnition: 13 Satisﬁability: By the satisﬁability of a predicate we mean that the predicate is true for some interpretation
Deﬁnition: 14 Validity: By the validity of a predicate we mean that the predicate is true for all interpretations
Deﬁnition: 15 Model: By a model of a predicate (an axiom system) we mean an interpretation for which the predicate (of the axiom system) holds
3 Yes, our notations, both the mathematical and RSL, have a three-valued logic where evaluation of a Boolean expression involving chaos leads to everything being undeﬁned !
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

2.3 Mathematics

2.3.2 Sets
Set theory is a branch of mathematical logic that studies sets, which informally are collections of objects. Although any type of object can be collected into a set, set theory is applied most often to objects that are relevant to mathematics [Wikipedia]. We shall make extensive use of the Zermelo-Fraenkel [155] version (1908, 1921) of set theory4. We refer to Appendix Sect. D.1.1 on Page 311 item [7] and Item 7 on Page 312, Sect. D.3.2 on Page 314, and Sect. D.3.6 on Page 316.

2.3.3 Types
Deﬁnition: 16 Type: By a type [as a noun] we shall mean a possibly inﬁnite set of valuesa of some kind.
a We shall take a classical set-theoretic, i.e., Zermelo-Fraenkel [155], view of types and sort in this monograph.
The ‘kind’ is what determines the type. The type of natural numbers, including the number 0, we give the name Nat; the integer type is named Intg; the type of real numbers is named Real. The type of truth values, Booleans, is named Bool. When deﬁning types, which we shall very often need to do, we shall make use of the RAISE Specification Language (RSL)’s type deﬁnition concept. We refer to Appendix Sect. D.1 on Page 311. We shall often use the term ‘type’ in the speciﬁc sense of there being a model for values of the type in the form of either the basic, atomic types given above, or in the form of
mathematical sets, A-set, A-infset5, Cartesian products, A× B× ···×C6, sequences, A∗, Aω7, maps, A→ m B8, and functions, A→B or A ∼→B9,
over basic or mathematical values, i.e., types A,B,C, etc. We use the RSL type deﬁnition approach. T stands for types. S stands for sorts. Q stands for further undeﬁned atomic values. Recursively deﬁned map and function types are not allowed.
T ::= Bool | Nat | Intg | Real | Q | S | T-set | T-infset [ﬁnite, respectively possibly inﬁnite sets] | T × T × ... × T [Cartesians] | T∗| Tω [ﬁnite, respectively possibly inﬁnite lists] | T → m T | T ← m→T [maps, respectively bijective maps] | T →T | T ∼→T [total, respectively partial functions]
Deﬁnition: 17 Sort: We shall use the term ‘sort’ to designate a possibly inﬁnite set of values of some further undeﬁned kind.
The term ‘sort’ is commonly used in algebraic semantics [338].
4 en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory 5 ﬁnite sets can be enumerated: {a1,a2,...,an}. Operators are ∈, ∪, ∩, ⊆, ⊂, <, cardinality, etc. 6 Cartesians are expressed as (a,b,...,c). 7 ﬁnite sequences can be enumerated: ⟨a1,a2,...,an⟩. Operators are hd (head), tl (tail), length, b, [i], elems, etc. 8 ﬁnite maps can be enumerated: [a17→b1,a27→b2,...,an7→bn ]. Operators are: · (m(a)), domain, rng (range), etc. 9 Functions are deﬁned: λx•E (x), see Example 3 on the following page.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
2 Logic and Mathematics SPACE, TIME and MATTER Identity and Mereology

2.3.4 Functions
Deﬁnition: 18 Function: By a function we shall understand ‘something’, which when applied to an argument value of some type, say A, yields a result value of some type, say B (where A and B may be the same type).
Deﬁnition: 19 Signature: By the signature of a function we mean a quadruple: (i) the, or a, name of the function, (ii) either the total function designator, →, or the partial function designator, ∼→, (iii) the type of its argument value(s), and (iv) the type of its result value.
Let the name of (i, iii, iv) be f, A and B, respectively, then we present the signature of the total and the partial functions f as follows:
value f: A →B value f: A ∼→B
Example 3 A Classical Function Deﬁnition A classical function is the factorial function. It can, for example, be deﬁned as follows:
value f: Nat →Nat, f(n) ≡if n ≡0 then 1 else n×f(n−1) end

2.3.4.1 Total and Partial Functions
Deﬁnition: 20 Total Function: By a total function we mean a function which is deﬁned for all arguments of its argument type.
Deﬁnition: 21 Partial Function: By a partial function we mean a function which is not deﬁned for all the values of its argument type.

2.3.4.2 Predicate Functions
Deﬁnition: 22 Predicate: By a predicate we mean a function whose result type is Boolean, i.e., Bool.
Predicates are, by necessity, total functions.
We have listed a number of concepts of mathematical logic. Several of these have related to the possibility of proofs. But a las ! In this monograph we shall use the notation of mathematical logic extensively. But not for proofs of properties neither of our descriptions nor of domains. We shall leave the ultimately desirable goal of formulating such properties: invariants and laws, and of their proofs to follow on the heals of this monograph. Before we can run we must learn to walk.

2.3.5 Mathematical Notation versus Formal Speciﬁcation Languages
2.3.5.1 Mathematics as a Notation – in General
We shall primarily make use of mathematics as a precise notation in which to express ideas about and the prompt calculi — including some, usually not computable, functions. That is: we shall not use mathematics to develop a proper theory of domain analysis & description. For that we refer to [62, Domain Analysis: Endurants – An Analysis & Description Process Model, 2014]. We have indicated issues of axiom systems, and we shall illustrate three axiom systems in this chapter: an Axiom System for Metric Spaces, Sect. 2.4.5 on Page 23; J. van Benthem’s A Continuum Theory of Time, Sect. 2.5.4 on Page 26; and Wayne D. Blizard’s A Theory of Time Space, Sect. 2.5.5 on Page 27.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

2.3 Mathematics
2.3.5.2 Mathematics as a Notation – in Speciﬁc
In many of the more than 100 examples, cf. appendix Sect. E.2 on Page 332 [an index of all examples], those that illustrate formalisation of domains, we use RSL [176], the RAISE Speciﬁcation Language [179]. But almost elsewhere in the text, in particular in Chapters 3–6, we use a mathematical notation. We comment here on that notation. Mathematics “as our notation” reﬂects that the mathematics we rely upon is what is often referred to as discrete mathematics [349, 138, 316, 248, 247, 137, 310, 7]. By discrete mathematics we mean such mathematics, whose disciplines rests set theory and mathematical logic, entails important constructive mathematical structures as
[i] sets, i.e., deﬁnite or indeﬁnite collections of mathematical values, {a,b,...,c}, respectively {a,b,...} (where the ..., see below, indicates “and so forth, possibly “ad inﬁnitum”); [ii] Cartesians, i.e., deﬁnite groupings of mathematical values, (a,b,...c), of mathematical values; [iii] lists, i.e., deﬁnite or indeﬁnite sequences of mathematical values, ⟨a,b,...,c⟩, respectively ⟨a,b,...⟩; [iv] maps, e.g., m, i.e., explicitly enumerated functions, [a17→b1,a27→b2,...,an7→bn], from ﬁnite deﬁnition sets, dom m = {a1,a2,...,an}, to ﬁnite range, or co-domain sets, rng m = {b1,b2,...,bn}, of mathematical values; and [v] functions, i.e., lambda-deﬁnable [125, 102, 15, 16, 17] function values: λx.E (x) where x is an arbitrary free identiﬁer and E (x) is an arbitrary expression in which x occurs, usually free – the expressions E (x) otherwise over the kind of values listed above and including respective operators.
The mathematical values include ground values of
Booleans, false, true, chaos : Bool; natural numbers, 0, 1, 2, . . . : Nat; integers, ..., -2 -1, 0, 1, 2, . . . : Intg; and reals, ..., -3.14159265359..., -0.5, ..., 0 ..., 1, +2.71828182846..., . . . : Real.
The mathematical values ﬁnally include such which are deﬁned through a type deﬁnition system “inherited” from RSL. In general our mathematical notation includes many of the clause structures of RSL, structures also found in VDM SL [30, 153, 154], its predecessor, as well as in many programming languages since Algol 60 [257]10 We refer to Appendix Sect. D for details. Example clause structures are:
var := clause, if b then c else a end, case p of e1→c1, ..., en→cn end, (p1→c1, ..., pn→cn) or (p1→c1, ..., →cn), for ∀e:E • e ∈set do c(e) end,
That is commensurate with the fact the the formal speciﬁcation languages, VDM SL [88, 89, 154] and RSL [176], (whose development and initial use, this author has been and is actively involved in since their inception) deeply reﬂects a discrete mathematics

2.3.5.2.1 The Dot-dot-dot Notation
It is very common, also in strict, “formalistic” mathematics papers to use an inductive form of dot notation: ... . Our mathematics notation deploys that good practice. As an interesting paper we refer to [5, Deductive Synthesis of Dot Expressions].
10 Algol W [368], CPL [18], PL/1 [278], Algol 68 [29, 106, 21], Pascal [255, 369], Modula [370, 295], Oberon [371, 372, 373], Ada [31], CHILL [116, 107, 194, 8], Java [184, 342], C # [234], etc.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
2 Logic and Mathematics SPACE, TIME and MATTER Identity and Mereology

2.3.5.2.2 The Quote Notation
Here comes an interesting “twist” to our mathematical notation. We refer to the use of quotes By quoting an expression, say the expression if b then c else a end, that is, by writing ❝if b then c else a end ❞we mean, not the valuation of the unquoted expression, but the text between the quotes; that is, we use the “bracketing” symbols ❝... ❞to indicate what, ..., is quoted. Our need for quoting is motivated as follows: The whole purpose of domain analysis & description is to be able to (i) logically analyse a domain and (ii) produce a textual description of that domain. It is with respect to the description procedures that there is a need for mathematically formally specify that a textual description be yielded. Hence the quotes. So keep your mind straight when, in Chapters 3–6 we “switch” between mathematical notation’s use of quotes with RSL-like expressions and “clean” RSL with no [need for] quotes. Historically the use of quoting can be attributed to John McCarthy [279, 280, 281, 1960s]11 and is manifest in Lisp [282]. Lisp’s use of quotes is explained and discussed by Miles Bain in milesmcbain.xyz/the-roots-of-quotation, in en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/M-expression [Wikipedia], stackoverflow.com/questions/134887/when-to-use-or-quote-in-lisp and gnu.org/software/emacs/manual/html node/elisp/Quoting.html.

2.3.5.3 An Interplay between Mathematical Notation and Speciﬁcation Languages
Thus this monograph illustrates a common phenomenon: that research–in–progress, into computing science, sometimes, as here, starts with, as here, domain analysis & description ideas, proceeds with these, making use of mathematical notation, gradually introducing more formal speciﬁcation language-like notation, while eventually, and thus, as here, implicitly, evolving what looks like a full, formal speciﬁcation language. We have not found the need, here, to design such a proper domain analyser & describer language. Mathematical notation has no formal syntax and no formal semantics. So, for the time being, "RSL", and as we shall later introduce, RSL+, has no formal syntax and no formal semantics. We leave that to interested readers !

2.4 Space
Mathematicians and physicists model space in, for example, the form of Hausdorf (or topological) space12; or a metric space which is a set for which distances between all members of the set are deﬁned; Those distances, taken together, are called a metric on the set; a metric on a space induces topological properties like open and closed sets, which lead to the study of more abstract topological spaces; or Euclidean space, due to Euclid of Alexandria.

2.4.1 Space Motivated Philosophically
Deﬁnition: 23 Indeﬁnite Space: We motivate the concept of indeﬁnite space as follows: [348, pp 154] “The two relations asymmetric and symmetric, by a transcendental deduction, can be given an interpretation: The relation (spatial) direction is asymmetric; and the relation (spatial) distance is symmetric. Direction and distance can be understood as spatial relations. From these relations are derived the relation in-between. Hence we must conclude that primary entities exist in space. Space is therefore an unavoidable characteristic of any possible world”
From the direction and distance relations one can derive Euclidean Geometry.
Deﬁnition: 24 Deﬁnite Space: By a deﬁnite space we shall understand a space with a deﬁnite metric
There is but just one space. It is all around us, from the inner earth to the farthest galaxy. It is not manifest. We can not observe it as we observe a road or a human.
11 John McCarthy: www-formal.stanford.edu/jmc/recursive.pdf Paul Graham: www.paulgraham.com/rootsoﬂisp.html Paul Graham: sep.yimg.com/ty/cdn/paulgraham/jmc.ps?t=1564708198& 12 Armstrong, M. A. (1983) [1979]. Basic Topology. Undergraduate Texts in Mathematics. Springer. ISBN 0-38790839-0.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

2.4 Space

2.4.2 The Spatial Value
67 There is an abstract notion of (deﬁnite) SPACE(s) of further unanalysable points; and 68 there is a notion of POINT in SPACE.
Space is not an attribute of endurants. Space is just there. So we do not deﬁne an observer, observe space. For us, bound to model mostly artifactual worlds on this earth there is but one space. Although SPACE, as a type, could be thought of as deﬁning more than one space we shall consider these isomorphic !

2.4.3 Spatial Observers
69 A point observer, observe POINT, is a function which applies to physical endurants, e, and yield a point, ℓ: POINT.
value observe POINT: E →POINT

2.4.4 Spatial Attributes
We suggest, besides POINTs, the following spatial attribute possibilities:
70 EXTENT as a dense set of POINTs; 71 Volume, of concrete type, for example, m3, as the “volume” of an EXTENT such that 72 SURFACEs as dense sets of POINTs have no volume, but an 73 Area, of concrete type, for example, m2, as the “area” of a dense set of POINTs; 74 LINE as dense set of POINTs with no volume and no area, but 75 Length, of concrete type, for example, m.
For these we have that
76 the intersection, T, of two EXTENTs is an EXTENT of possibly nil Volume, 77 the intersection, T, of two SURFACEs may be either a possibly nil SURFACE or a possibly nil LINE, or a combination of these. 78 the intersection, T, of two LINEs may be either a possibly nil LINE or a POINT.
Similarly we can deﬁne
79 the union, S, of two not-disjoint EXTENTs, 80 the union, S, of two not-disjoint SURFACEs, 81 the union, S, and of two not-disjoint LINEs.
82 the [in]equality, ,,=, of pairs of EXTENT, pairs of SURFACEs, and pairs of LINEs.
We invite the reader to ﬁrst ﬁrst express the signatures for these operations, then their pre-conditions, and ﬁnally, being courageous, appropriate fragments of axiom systems.

2.4.5 Mathematical Models of Space
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
2 Logic and Mathematics SPACE, TIME and MATTER Identity and Mereology

2.4.5.1 Metric Spaces
A metric space is an ordered pair (M,d) where M is a set and d is a metric on M, i.e., a function:
such that for any x,y,z ∈M, the following holds:
d(x,y) = 0 ≡x = y identity of indiscernibles (2.1)
d(x,y) = d(y,x) symmetry (2.2)
d(x,z) ≤d(x,y)+d(y,z) sub-additivity or triangle inequality (2.3)
Given the above three axioms, we also have that d(x,y) ≥0 for any x,y ∈M. This is deduced as follows:
d(x,y)+d(y,x) ≥d(x,x) triangle inequality (2.4)
d(x,y)+d(y,x) ≥d(x,x) by symmetry (2.5)
2d(x,y) ≥0 identity of indiscernibles (2.6)
d(x,y) ≥0 non-negativity (2.7)
The function d is also called distance function or simply distance. Often, d is omitted and one just writes M for a metric space if it is clear from the context what metric is used.

2.5 Time
a moving image of eternity; the number of the movement in respect of the before and the after; the life of the soul in movement as it passes from one stage of act or experience to another; a present of things past: memory, a present of things present: sight, and a present of things future: expectations13
13 Quoted from [12, Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy]
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

2.5 Time
This thing all things devours: Birds, beasts, trees, ﬂowers; Gnaws iron, bites steel, Grinds hard stones to meal; Slays king, ruins town, And beats high mountain down.14
Concepts of time continue to fascinate philosophers and scientists [353, 152, 284, 318, 319, 320, 321, 322, 323, 324, 335] and [156].

2.5.1 Time Motivated Philosophically
Deﬁnition: 25 Indeﬁnite Time: We motivate the abstract notion of time as follows. [348, pp 159] “Two different states must necessarily be ascribed different incompatible predicates. But how can we ensure so ? Only if states stand in an asymmetric relation to one another. This state relation is also transitive. So that is an indispensable property of any world. By a transcendental deduction we say that primary entities exist in time. So every possible world must exist in time”
Deﬁnition: 26 Deﬁnite Time: By a deﬁnite time we shall understand an abstract representation of time such as for example year, month, day, hour, minute, second, et cetera
Temporal Notions of Endurants
Example 4 By temporal notions of endurants we mean time properties of endurants, usually modelled as attributes. Examples are: (i) the time stamped link trafﬁc, cf. Item 191 on Page 100 and (ii) the time stamped hub trafﬁc, cf. Item 187 on Page 99.

2.5.2 Time Values
We shall not be concerned with any representation of time. That is, we leave it to the domain analyser cum describer to choose an own representation [156]. Similarly we shall not be concerned with any representation of time intervals.15
83 So there is an abstract type Time, 84 and an abstract type TI: TimeInterval. 85 There is no Time origin, but there is a “zero” TIme interval. 86 One can add (subtract) a time interval to (from) a time and obtain a time. 87 One can add and subtract two time intervals and obtain a time interval – with subtraction respecting that the subtrahend is smaller than or equal to the minuend. 88 One can subtract a time from another time obtaining a time interval respecting that the subtrahend is smaller than or equal to the minuend. 89 One can multiply a time interval with a real and obtain a time interval. 90 One can compare two times and two time intervals.
14 J.R.R. Tolkien, The Hobbit 15 – but point out, that although a deﬁnite time interval may be referred to by number of years, number of days (less than 365), number of hours (less than 24), number of minutes (less than 60)number of seconds (less than 60), et cetera, this is not a time, but a time interval.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
2 Logic and Mathematics SPACE, TIME and MATTER Identity and Mereology
type value 0:TI +,−: T × TI →T
+,−: TI × TI ∼→TI −: T × T →TI ∗: TI × Real →TI <,≤,=,,,≥,>: T × T →Bool <,≤,=,,,≥,>: TI × TI →Bool axiom 86 ∀t:T • t+0 = t

2.5.3 Temporal Observers
91 We deﬁne the signature of the meta-physical time observer.
type 91 T value 91 record TIME(): Unit →T
The time recorder applies to nothing and yields a time. record TIME() can only occur in action, event and behavioural descriptions.
Caveat: You may wish to skip the rest of this chapter’s many sections, i.e., Sects. 2.5.4–2.5.10, on time. That may come as a surprise to you. But in our domain modelling we shall refrain from modelling temporal aspects of domains! So why bring all this material ? We bring (“all”) this material so that you will know what you are missing ! That is, what should also be considered in domain modelling. We therefore leave it to others16 to redress this omission. Besides, most of the present work on applying temporal logics in our ﬁeld has been to software design (requirements).
Modern models of time, by mathematicians and physicists evolve around spacetime17 We shall not be concerned with this notion of time. Models of time related to computing differs from those of mathematicians and physicists in focusing on divergence and convergence, zero (Zenon) time and interleaving time [377] are relevant in studies of real-time, typically distributed computing systems. We shall also not be concerned with this notion of time.
2.5.4 J. van Benthem
16 – that is: other researchers, lecturers, textbooks 17 The concept of Spacetime was ﬁrst “announced” by Hermann Minkowski, 1907–08 – based on work by Henri Poincar´e, 1905–06, https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Translation: The Fundamental Equations for Electromagnetic Processes in Moving Bodies
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

2.5 Time
can be deﬁned. Time can be dense: Given any two times one can always ﬁnd a time between them. Discrete time can be deﬁned.
A Continuum Theory of Time
A strict partial order, SPO, is a point structure satisfying TRANS and IRREF. TRANS, IRREF and SUCC imply inﬁnite models. TRANS and SUCC may have ﬁnite, “looping time” models.
2.5.5 Wayne D. Blizard: A Theory of Time–Space
We shall present an axiom system [101, Wayne D. Blizard, 1980] which relate abstracted entities to spatial points and time. Let A,B,... stand for entitites, p,q,... for spatial points, and t,τ for times. 0 designates a ﬁrst, a begin time. Let t′ stand for the discrete time successor of time t. Let N(p,q) express that p and q are spatial neighbours. Let = be an overloaded equality operator applicable, pairwise to entities, spatial locations and times, respectively. At p expresses that entity A is at location p at time t. The axioms — where we omit (obvious) typings (of A, B, P, Q, and T): ′ designates the time successsor function: t′.
A Theory of Time–Space
(I) ∀A∀t∃p : Atp (II) (Atp ∧Atq) ⊃p = q (III) (Atp ∧Btp) ⊃A = B (IV)(?) (Atp ∧At′ p) ⊃t = t′
(V i) ∀p,q : N(p,q) ⊃p , q Irreﬂexivity (V ii) ∀p,q : N(p,q) = N(q, p) Symmetry (V iii) ∀p∃q,r : N(p,q)∧N(p,r)∧q , r No isolated locations (VI i) ∀t : t , t′
(VI ii) ∀t : t′ , 0 (VI iii) ∀t : t , 0 ⊃∃τ : t = τ′
(II–IV,VII–VIII): The axioms are universally ‘closed’; that is: We have omitted the usual ∀A,B, p,q,ts.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
2 Logic and Mathematics SPACE, TIME and MATTER Identity and Mereology
Except for Axiom (IV) the system applies both to systems of entities that “sometimes” rests, i.e., do not move. These entities are spatial and occupy at least a point in space. If some entities “occupy more” space volume than others, then we interpret, in a suitable manner, the notion of the point space P (etc.). We do not show so here.
2.5.6 “Soft” and “Hard” Real-time
We loosely identify a spectrum of from “soft” to “hard” temporalities — through some informally worded texts. On that background we can introduce the term ‘real-time’. And hence distinguish between ‘soft’ and ‘hard’ real-time issues. From an example of trying to formalise these in RSL, we then set the course for this chapter.

2.5.7 Soft Temporalities
You have often wished, we assume, that “your salary never goes down, say between your ages of 25 to 65”. How to express that? Taking into account other factors, you may additionally wish that “your salary goes up.” How do we express that? Taking also into account that your job is a seasonal one, we may need to reﬁne the above into “between un-employments your salary does not go down”. How now to express that?

2.5.8 Hard Temporalities
The above quoted (“...”) statements may not have convinced you about the importance of speaking precisely about time, whether narrating or formalising. So let’s try some other examples: “The alarm clock must sound exactly at 6 am unless someone has turned it off sometime between 5am and 6 am the same morning.” “The gas valve must be open for exactly 20 seconds every 60 seconds.” “The sum total of time periods — during which the gas valve is open and there is no ﬂame consuming the gas — must not exceed one twentieth of the time the gas valve is open.” “The time between pressing an elevator call button on any ﬂoor and the arrival of the cage and the opening of the cage door at that ﬂoor must not exceed a given time tarrival”. The next sections will hint at ways and means of speaking of time.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

2.5 Time

2.5.9 Soft and Hard Real-time
The informally worded temporalities of “soft real-time” can be said to involve time in a very “soft” way: No explicit times (eg., 15:45:00), deadlines (eg., “27’th February 2004”), or time intervals (eg., “within 2 hours”), were expressed. The informally worded temporalities of “hard real-time”, in contrast, can be said to involve time in a “hard” way: Explicit times were mentioned. For pragmatic reasons, we refer to the former examples, the former “invocations” of ‘temporality’, as being representative of soft real-time, whereas we say that the latter invocations are typical of hard realtime. Please do not confuse the issue of soft versus hard real-time: It is as much hard real-time if we say that something must happen two light years and ﬁve seconds from tomorrow at noon!
Soft Real-Time Models Expressed in “Ordinary” RSL Logic
Example 5 Let us assume a salary data base SDB which at any time records your salary. In the conventional way of modelling time in RSL we assume that SDB maps time into Salary:
Time, Sal SDB = Time → m Sal value
hi: (Sal×Sal)|(Time×Time) →Bool eq: (Sal×Sal)|(Time×Time) →Bool lo: (Sal×Sal)|(Time×Time) →Bool axiom
Hard Real-Time Models Expressed in “Ordinary” RSL Logic
Example 6 To express hard real-time using just RSL we must assume a demon, a process which represents the clock:
time: Unit →T time() as t axiom
The axiom is informal: It states that no two invocations of the time function yields the same value. But this is not enough. We need to express that “immediately consecutive” invocations of the time function yields “adjacent” time points. T provides a linear model of real-time.
t2 := time(); t2 −t1 = /∗inﬁnitesimally small time interval: TI∗/ ∧
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
2 Logic and Mathematics SPACE, TIME and MATTER Identity and Mereology
t2 > t1 ∧∼∃t:T• t1 < t < t2 )

2.5.10 Temporal Logics
“The term Temporal Logic has been broadly used to cover all approaches to the representation of temporal information within a logical framework, and also more narrowly to refer speciﬁcally to the modal-logic type of approach introduced around 1960 by Arthur Prior under the name of Tense Logic and subsequently developed further by logicians and computer scientists.”19
“Applications of Temporal Logic include its use as a formalism for clarifying philosophical issues about time, as a framework within which to deﬁne the semantics of temporal expressions in natural language, as a language for encoding temporal knowledge in artiﬁcial intelligence, and as a tool for handling the temporal aspects of the execution of computer programs.”

2.5.10.1 The Issues
The basic issue is simple: To be able to speak of temporal phenomena without having to explicitly mentioning time. That goes for vague, or “soft” notions of time: What we could call “soft real-time”, that something happens at a time, or during a time interval, but with no “ﬁxing” of absolute times nor time intervals. It also, of course, goes for precise, or “hard” notions of time: What we could call “hard real-time”, that something happens at a very deﬁnitive point in time, or during a time interval of a very speciﬁc length, and thus with “ﬁxing” of absolute times or time intervals.
2.5.10.2 A. N. Prior’s Tense Logics
We present a philosophical linguistics motivated temporal logic. Following the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy,20 Arthur Prior [322, 323, 324] developed a tense logic along the lines presented below:
Pp: “It has at some time been the case that p held” Fp: “It will at some time be the case that p holds” Hp: “It has always been the case that p held” Gp: “It will always be the case that p holds”
P and F are known as the weak tense operators, while H and G are known as the strong tense operators. The two pairs are generally regarded as inter-deﬁnable by way of the equivalences:
Pp ≡∼H(∼p) Fp ≡∼G(∼p)
On the basis of these intended meanings, Prior used the operators to build formulas expressing various philosophical theses about time, which might be taken as axioms of a formal system if so desired. Some examples of such formulas, with Prior’s own glosses (from [323]), are:
19 This and the next slanted quoted text paragraphs are taken from http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/logic-temporal/. 20 http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/prior/
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

2.5 Time
Gp⇒Fp: What will always be, will be G(p⇒q)⇒(Gp⇒Gq) If p will always imply q, then if p will always be the case, so will q Fp⇒FFp If it will be the case that p, it will be −in between −that it will be ∼Fp⇒F∼Fp If it will never be that p then it will be that it will never be that p
A special temporal logic is the Minimal Tense Logic Kt. It is generated by the four axioms:
p⇒HFp What is, has always been going to be p⇒GPp What is, will always have been H(p⇒q)⇒(Hp⇒Hq) Whatever always follows from what always has been, always has been G(p⇒q)⇒(Gp⇒Gq) Whatever always follows from what always will be, always will be

2.5.10.3 The Duration Calculus
The duration calculus, DC, is due to Zhou Chao Chen, C.A.R. Hoare, Anders P. Ravn, Michael Reichhardt Hansen and others. The deﬁnitive introductory work on DC is [380]. We present a terse summary.
2.5.10.3.1 A Function & Safety Example
We show a classical example. (1) For a lift system to be adequate it must always be safe and function adequately. There are three functional requirements. (2) For the lift system to be safe, then for any duration that the door on ﬂoor i is open, the lift must be also at that ﬂoor. (3) The length of time between when someone pushes a button, inside a lift cage, to send it to ﬂoor i, and the arrival of that cage at ﬂoor i must be less than some time ts. (4) The length of time between when someone pushes a button, at ﬂoor i, to call it to that ﬂoor, and the arrival of a cage at that ﬂoor must be less than some time tc. (5) The length of time that a door is open when a cage is at ﬂoor i must be at least some time to.

2.5.10.3.2 The Syntax
We only present an overview of the DC syntax. The presentation of this part follows that of Skakkebæk et al. [343] (1992).
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
2 Logic and Mathematics SPACE, TIME and MATTER Identity and Mereology
2.5.10.3.2.1 Simple Expressions: We deﬁne simple, i.e., atomic expressions.
x,y,...,z:State Variable a,b,...,c:Static Variable ff,tt:Bool Const k,k′,...,k′′:Const
Static variables designate time-independent values. We assume some context which helps us determine the type of variables.
2.5.10.3.2.2 State Expressions and Assertions: We deﬁne state expressions and state assertions. A state assertion is a state expression of type Bool, and op is an operator symbol of arity n. We assume a context which helps us determine that an identiﬁer is an op!
se:State Expr ::= Const | Bool Const | op(se1,...,sen) P:State Asrt ::= State Expr
We assume a context which helps us determine that a state expression is of type Bool, i.e., is a state assertion.
2.5.10.3.2.3 Durations and Duration Terms: If P is a state assertion, then R P is a duration. We deﬁne duration terms.
dt:Dur Term ::= R P | Real | op(dt1,...,dtn) | ℓ
ℓis an abbreviation for the duration term R tt. op is an n operator symbol of type Real. We assume a context which helps us determine that an identiﬁer is an op!
2.5.10.3.2.4 Duration Formulas: We deﬁne duration formulas. Let A be any n-ary predicate symbol over real-valued duration arguments. We assume a context which helps us determine that an identiﬁer is an
d:Dur Form ::= A(dt1,...,dtn) | true | false | | ∼d′ | d1∨dn | d1;dn | d1∧dn | d1⇒dn | d1∧dn | ∀a: d /∗a is ∗/ Static Variable
Delimiting parentheses can be inserted to clarify precedence.

2.5.10.3.2.5 Common Duration Formula Abbreviations: We make free use of the following common abbreviations:
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

2.8 Identity and Mereology

2.5.10.3.3 Discussion: From Domains to Designs
We have covered core aspects of the Duration Calculus. The Duration Calculus offers a logic based on intervals and real-time. One can use the Duration Calculus to abstractly express constraints, i.e., requirements, on the duration of states. One can also use the Duration Calculus to abstractly express properties of the domain, i.e., of the application area for which software is sought. And one can ﬁnally hint at major design decisions also using the Duration Calculus. Only in a very implicit sense can Duration Calculus expressions be said to specify sequential programs — such as we are normally prepared to implement in computing systems: in terms of sequential programs. A Duration Calculus expression, however, usually implies a sequential program, or a set of cooperating such. RSL speciﬁcations, the “closer” we get to software design, i.e., the more “concrete” such speciﬁcations become, rather speciﬁcally specify sequential programs. At least, it would be a good idea for the developer to make sure that this is so! Now how can we combine the ability of the Duration Calculus to express quantitative properties of software (to be designed) and the actual speciﬁcation of such software? We turn to this question next. That is, we may seem to completely abandon thoughts and concepts of Duration Calculus, in favour of rather “down to earth” concepts of explicit timing in what could be considered a speciﬁcation programming language, Timed RSL, TRSL.

2.6 Spatial and Temporal Modelling
It is not always that we are compelled to endow our domain descriptions with those of spatial and/or temporal properties. In our experimental domain descriptions, for example, [67, 95, 71, 69, 42, 55, 64, 36], we have either found no need to model space and/or time, or we model them explicitly, using slightly different types and observers than presented above. We have brought this material on various temporal logics in order to strongly hint at their being used in domain modelling – so there is an interesting challenge!

2.7 Matter
Space, in the sense of SPACE, is “inhabited”! The inhabitants are the entities that Kai Sørlander’s Philosophy refers to, Page 13. They possess properties about which we reason. We shall take the view that these entities are of MATTER. Matter is anything that has mass and takes up space. The modelling of matters, sometimes referred to as MATTER, is done primarily by means of attributes. We refer to a future, extensive section, Sect. 4.4, on Attributes. But already here is a good place to discuss the ‘matter’ of matter ! How does matter manifest itself to you, a human mortal, the domain analyser & describer ? You, yourself, your body, is a manifestation of matter. The room, you are in, is matter. The things in it, each are matter. The outdoor environment, in which you walk, is matter. Is the air, you breathe, matter ? Yes we say ! Is the atmosphere21 matter ? Yes indeed. Really ? Does atmosphere have mass ? Yes, indeed ! There is a notion: substance theory22. We shall not discuss its possible rˆole here. But we shall take the liberty of sometimes using the term ‘substance’ in lieu of the term ‘matter’.

2.8 Identity and Mereology
Identity, as a philosophical issue, has emerged from Kai Sørlander’s Philosophy, Chapter1. We shall make capital use of that concept in this monograph. Mereology, as a philosophical and logic issue, was studied
21 – the troposphere, stratosphere, ozone layer, mesosphere, thermosphere, ionosphere, exosphere, ... 22 Substance theory, or substance-attribute theory, is an ontological theory about object-hood positing that a substance is distinct from its properties. A thing-in-itself is a property-bearer that must be distinguished from the properties it bears [Wikipedia].
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
2 Logic and Mathematics SPACE, TIME and MATTER Identity and Mereology
by Stanisław Le´sniewski, a Polish philosopher/logician in the 1920s [271, 359, 344]. We shall likewise make capital use of that concept in this monograph. Section 2.8.2 next provides an informal discussion of the concept.

2.8.1 Identity
It is a fact, that is, an absolutely necessary condition for our description of any world that its entities have unique identity. It is, however a problem in our domain analyser & describer, to secure such identity; so we must, wherever necessary present axioms expressing so. This will be done in Sect. 4.2. A further treatment of mereology is given in AppendixB.

2.8.2 Mereology: Philosophy and Logic
“Mereology (from the Greek µερoς ‘part’) is a theory of part-hood relations: of the relations of part to whole and the relations of part to part within a whole”23.

2.8.2.1 Mereology Understood Spatially
In this contribution we restrict ‘parts’ to be those that, ﬁrstly, are spatially distinguishable, then, secondly, while “being based” on such spatially distinguishable parts, are conceptually related. We use the term ‘part’ in a more general sense than in [70]. The relation: “being based”, shall be made clear in this paper. Accordingly two parts, px and py, (of a same “whole”) are are either “adjacent”, or are “embedded within”, one within the other, as loosely indicated in Fig. 2.2. ‘Adjacent’ parts are direct parts of a same third part,
Embedded Within Adjacent
pz, i.e., px and py are “embedded within” pz; or one (px) or the other (py) or both (px and py) are parts of a same third part, p′ z “embedded within” pz; et cetera; as loosely indicated in Fig. 2.3, or one is “embedded within” the other — etc. as loosely indicated in Fig. 2.3.
Embedded Within Adjacent
Embedded Within Adjacent
23 Achille Varzi: Mereology, http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/mereology/ 2009 and [115].
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

2.9 A Foundation
Parts, whether ‘adjacent’ or ‘embedded within’, can share properties. For adjacent parts this sharing seems, in the literature, to be diagrammatically expressed by letting the part rectangles “intersect”. Usually properties are not spatial hence ‘intersection’ seems confusing. We refer to Fig. 2.4.
Embedded Sharing Adjacent and Sharing Embedded Within Adjacent
Instead of depicting parts sharing properties as in Fig. 2.4[L]eft, where shaded, dashed rounded-edge rectangles stands for ‘sharing’, we shall (eventually) show parts sharing properties as in Fig. 2.4[R]ight where •—• connections connect those parts.

2.8.2.2 Our Informal Understanding of Mereology
Mereology, to us, is the study and knowledge about how physical and conceptual parts relate and what it means for a part to be related to another part: being disjoint, being adjacent, being neighbours, being contained properly within, being properly overlapped with, et cetera. By physical parts we mean such spatial individuals which can be pointed to. Examples: a road net (consisting of street segments and street intersections); a street segment (between two intersections); a street intersection; a road (of sequentially neigbouring street segments of the same name); a vehicle; and a platoon (of sequentially neigbouring vehicles). By a conceptual part we mean an abstraction with no physical extent, which is either present or not. Examples: a bus timetable (not as a piece or booklet of paper, or as an electronic device, but) as an image in the minds of potential bus passengers; and routes of a pipeline, that is, neighbouring sequences of pipes, valves, pumps, forks and joins, for example referred to in discourse: “the gas ﬂows through “such-and-such” a route”. The tricky thing here is that a route may be thought of as being both a concept or being a physical part — in which case one ought give them different names: a planned route and an actual road, for example. The mereological notion of subpart, that is: contained within can be illustrated by examples: the intersections and street segments are subparts of the road net; vehicles are subparts of a platoon; and pipes, valves, pumps, forks and joins are subparts of pipelines. The mereological notion of adjacency can be illustrated by examples. We consider the various controls of an air trafﬁc system, cf. Fig. B.1 on Page 293, as well as its aircraft, as adjacent within the air trafﬁc system; the pipes, valves, forks, joins and pumps of a pipeline, cf. Fig. B.6 on Page 296, as adjacent within the pipeline system; two or more banks of a banking system, cf. Fig. B.3 on Page 295, as being adjacent. The mereo-topological notion of neighbouring can be illustrated by examples: Some adjacent pipes of a pipeline are neighbouring (connected) to other pipes or valves or pumps or forks or joins, et cetera; two immediately adjacent vehicles of a platoon are neighbouring. The mereological notion of proper overlap can be illustrated by examples some of which are of a general kind: two routes of a pipelines may overlap; and two conceptual bus timetables may overlap with some, but not all bus line entries being the same; and some really reﬂect adjacency: two adjacent pipe overlap in their connection, a wall between two rooms overlap each of these rooms — that is, the rooms overlap each other “in the wall”.

2.9 A Foundation
This, then, is the foundation upon which this monograph is built: the Concepts, as outlined in Chapter 0, the Philosophy of Kai Sørlander, as outlined in Chapter 1, and Logic and Mathematics, the closer
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
2 Logic and Mathematics SPACE, TIME and MATTER Identity and Mereology
inspection of the concepts SPACE, TIME and MATTER, and Identity, and Mereology of the present chapter.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

DOMAINS
Chapter 3–7 Overview
In the next four chapters “we introduce a domain science & engineering” of domain analysis & description. These four chapters treat “more-or-less” separable core topics of domain analysis & description. The treatment focuses on what we shall call the intrinsics, the essentials of domains.
Chapter 3 introduces the concepts of entities, endurants and perdurants and unveils basic principles and techniques for the analysis & description of what we shall call external endurant qualities, those which we can experience by looking at them ! Chapter 4 unveils basic principles and techniques for the analysis & description of what we shall call internal endurant qualities, like identity, mereology or those, attributes, which we can otherwise measure by physical instruments or which record events. Chapter 5 provides a bridge between the principles and techniques of Chapters 3–4 and Chapter 6 by further elaborating on the idea of transcendental deduction ﬁrst introduced in Chapter 1; while also covering the concepts of space and time, not as metaphysical phenomena, but, with our background in Kai Sørlander’s Philosophy, as rational, transcendentally understood concepts. Chapter 6, ﬁnally, concludes the basic domain analysis & description principles and techniques by transcendentally relating endurants, the “still” entities, observable in space, to perdurants, the “discrete dynamic” entities, observable also in time: actions, events and behaviours.
Chapters 3–4 show you how to systematically develop descriptions of the structure and values of domains while Chapter 6 shows you how to follow that up with the development of core aspects of the behaviour of domains.
Chapter 7 covers some principles and techniques of mostly non-intrinsical domain entities.
A Theory, not The Theory
We write: “we introduce a domain science & engineering ...”. By this we mean: “there may be other such domain science & engineerings” ! The science & engineering we refer to are the domain analysis & description prompts24. We shall introduce these analysis & description prompts in the next four chapters. But there could be another composition than the one we offer. The present one has served well in guiding the domain analysis & description of many domains [80]. The notions of conjoins, for example, are based very much on a mixture of observations and pragmatism, and, as such could be replaced ! Anyway, the reader is guided, in the next 4 chapters, into this ontology and should, from there, be able to modify that ontology to suit the problem at hand.
On Learning a Theory and On Learning a Method
In this monograph we aim to develop a theory of domain analysis & description, and to develop a method of analysing & describing domains. The two things are not quite the same, but, obviously, related. It is important that the reader understands the next subsections. Because of the double aim it is possible that the reader misses the distinction, and hence to learn either ! First you learn about it ! Then you learn to do it !
Towards a Theory of Domain Analysis & Description
Before one can practice a method one must learn (i) its possible theoretical basis. In this monograph the text from which you should learn about a theoretical basis for domain analysis & description is interwoven with the text from which you should learn about the method, i.e. the practice of applying some of the theory. Being interwoven may mean that the reader forgets what it is that is being communicated. The unfolding of the “story” of the possible theoretical basis is careful, “slow”, almost pedantic. It is perhaps easy to get lost and forget that other thing to be learned, (ii), the method.
A Method for Domain Analysis & Description
The method, to repeat, embodies principles, techniques and tools for the analysis & description of domains. So how does one proceed in doing a domain model ? First one determines what the domain is, i.e., an endurant. Then you analyse it as prescribed. At one point you are then ready to describe the root of the domain, as a composite, or as a structure, or as a material. That description leads to the analysis of sub-endurants, usually several. In a single person project you therefore have to put some of these ’several’ other endurants on hold, say put as a reminder on what we shall call a notice board. Then later, again an again, from the subsequent analysis & description of these other endurants emerges yet more endurants to be analysed & described. Etcetera. The method involves an iterative process. For the professional, practicing domain analyser & describer when, as is covered in Chapter3, analyses & describes the external qualities of endurants that person is fully aware of their being also internal qualities to analyse & described, and also, subsequently, their transcendental deduction into perdurants: channels, variables and behaviours. In Chapter 3, however, we pose exercise problems, at a stage where the problem solver has yet to learn, as in subsequent chapters, 4–6, about internal qualities, such which ultimately decide on the sort of an endurant; thus the problem solver is, to an extent, disadvantaged; hence may, after. f.ex. Chapter 4 (etc.), have to return to “improve” on a proposed problem solution. It cannot be otherwise.

24 These are some analysis prompts
is compound pg. 56, is conjoin pg. 59, is part materials pg. 59, is material parts pg. 60, is part parts pg. 61.
is entity pg. 43, is endurant pg. 47, is perdurant pg. 48, is discrete pg. 48, is continuous pg. 49, is physical part pg. 50, is structure pg. 50,
is living species pg. 51, is natural-partpg. 51, is artefact pg. 51, is plant pg. 54, is animal pg. 54, is human pg. 54, is atomic pg. 56,
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41
DOMAINS – A Taxonomy External Qualities
In this chapter we introduce the concepts of endurants and perdurants, the concept of external qualities1 of endurants, and cover the analysis and description of external qualities of endurants.
Our focus is on domains. So what are domains? .

3.1 Overview of this Chapter
This is a large chapter. It spans Pages 39–84. To help the reader we present this overview. Some sections can be “armchair-read”. They introduce overall concepts. These are Sects. 3.2, 3.3, 3.5, 3.14 and ??. Section 3.20 presents background theory material. It can be skipped, but, when read, must be read carefully. Sections 3.6–3.18 and 3.15 form a ﬁrst “half” of serious study sections on the ontology of entities and the analysis of external qualities of endurants. Sections 3.16–3.19 form the second“half” of serious study sections on the description of external qualities of endurants.

3.2 Domains
Deﬁnition: 27 Domain: By a domain we shall understand a rationally describable segment of a discrete dynamics segment of a human assisted reality, i.e., of the world, its physical parts: natural [“God-given”] and artefactual [“man-made”], and its living species: plants and animals including, notably, humans. These are endurants (“still”), as well as perdurants (“alive”). Emphasis is placed on “humanassisted”, that is, that there is at least one (man-made) artefact and, therefore, that humans are a primary cause for change of endurant states as well as perdurant behaviours
This is a terse, but not a fully satisfactory characterisation. But it is the best we can come up with ! Let us examine it in some detail.
By a rational description we mean: a description which is logical, that is, a description over which one can reason; furthermore we shall in addition to this, by rational, mean a description which otherwise deploys additional mathematical concepts. By discrete dynamics we mean: a behaviour of the domain which, over time, varies, but in discrete steps: endurant entities may move or change form in space, values of endurant mereologies may vary, and/or values of endurant attributes may vary.
1 We refer to Deﬁnition 29 on Page 42 [Sect. 3.4] for an attempt to deﬁne the concept of external quality.
3 DOMAINS – A Taxonomy External Qualities
Control theory, the study of the control of continuously operating dynamical systems in engineered processes and machines, is one thing; domain engineering is “a different thing”. Control theory builds upon classical physics, and uses classical mathematics, partial differential equations, etc., to model phenomena of physics and therefrom engineered ‘machines’. Domain science & engineering, in some contrast, builds upon mathematical logic, and, to some extent, modern algebra, to model phenomena of mostly artefactual systems.
By “a reality” we mean: that which we, as humans, with our senses, can see, hear, smell, taste and touch — as well as that for which we humans have devised apparatuses that measure: mass (kg), time interval (s), temperature (K), electric current (A), amount of substance (mol), luminous intensity (cd), and distance (m). By “a human assisted reality” we mean: a world in which focus is on man made endurants and human instigated actions, events and behaviours.
The other technical terms will be explained more formally in the rest of this chapter.
Deﬁnition: 28 Domain Description: By a domain description we shall understand a combination of narration and formalisation of a domain. A formal speciﬁcation is a collection of sort, or type deﬁnitions, function and behaviour deﬁnitions, together with axioms and proof obligations constraining the deﬁnitions. A speciﬁcation narrative is a natural language text which in terse statements introduces the names of (in this case, the domain), and, in cases, also the deﬁnitions, of sorts (types), functions, behaviours and axioms; not anthropomorphically, but by emphasizing their properties
Domain descriptions are (to be) void of any reference to future, contemplated software, let alone IT systems, that may then2 support entities of the domain. As such domain models3 can be studied separately, for their own sake, for example as a basis for investigating possible domain theories, or can, subsequently, form the basis for requirements engineering with a view towards development of (‘future’) software, etc. Our aim is to provide a method for the precise analysis and the formal description of domains.

3.3 Universe of Discourse
By a universe of discourse we shall understand the same as the domain of interest, that is, the domain to be analysed & described
Universes of Discourse
Example 7 4We refer to a number of Internet accessible experimental reports5 of descriptions of the following domains:
railways [35, 85, 38], container shipping [42], stock exchange [55], oil pipelines [60], “The Market” [36], Web systems [54],
weather information [67], credit card systems [64], document systems [71], urban planning [95], swarms of drones [69], container terminals [73]
2 – but it may be that a domain being analysed & described depends crucially on IT and software – in which case that must somehow, “ever so abstractly”, be described ! 3 We use the terms ‘domain descriptions’ and ‘domain models’ interchangeably.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

3.3 Universe of Discourse
Method Step 1 Select Domain of Interest:
A principle of the method is, as an initial step of the development of a domain analyser & describer, is to select the universe of discourse, to ascribe it a sort name, say UoD, and to remember that that universe, and, as a technique, be subject to analysis & description .
Domain Description Prompt 0 name and sketch universe of discourse:
name and sketch universe of discourse
A Road Transport Domain, I
Rough Sketch: The road transport system that we have in mind consists of a road net and a set of vehicles such that the road net serves to convey vehicles. We consider the road net to consist of hubs, i.e., street intersections, or just street segment connection points, and links, i.e., street segments between adjacent hubs. We consider vehicles to consist of departments of motor vehicles, bus companies, each with zero, one or more buses, and vehicle associations, each with zero, one or more members who are owners of zero, one or more vehicles
It may be a “large” domain, that is, consist of many, as we shall see, endurants and perdurants, of many parts and materials, of many humans and artefacts, and of many actors, actions, events and behaviours. Or it may be a “small” domain, that is, consist of a few such entities. The choice of “boundaries”, that is, of how much or little to include, and of how much or little to exclude is entirely the choice of the domain engineer cum scientist: the choice is crucial, and is not always obvious. The choice delineates an interface, that is, that which is within the boundary, i.e., is in the domain, and that which is without, i.e., outside the domain, i.e., is the context of the domain, that is, the external domain interfaces. Experience helps set reasonable boundaries. There are two “situations”: Either a domain analysis & description endeavour is pursued in order to prepare for a subsequent development of requirements modelling, in which case one tends to choose a “narrow” domain, that is, one that “ﬁts”, includes, but not much more, the domain of interest for the requirements. Or a domain analysis & description endeavour is pursued in order to research a domain. Either one that can form the basis for subsequent engineering studies aimed, eventually at requirements development; in this case “wider” boundaries may be sought. Or one that experimentally “throws a larger
4 In this monograph we bring several categories of numbered examples. There are the examples, let us call them the text explanatory examples; then there are two kinds of examples related to domains: the informal domain examples and formal domain examples. The latter exemplify the kind of domain analysis & descriptions this monograph studies and for which this monograph presents a method for their construction. We leave it to the reader to discern which examples are what ! 5 These are draft reports, more-or-less complete. The writing of these reports was ﬁnished when sufﬁcient evidence, conforming or refuting one or another aspect of the domain analysis & description method.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
3 DOMAINS – A Taxonomy External Qualities
net”, that is, seeks a “large” domain so as to explore interfaces between what is thought of as internal system interfaces. Where, then, to start the domain analysis & description ? Either one can start “bottom-up”, that is, with atomic entities: endurants or perdurants, one-by-one, and work one’s way “out”, to include composite entities, again endurants or perdurants, to ﬁnally reach some satisfaction: Eureka, a goal has been reached. Or one can start “top-down”, that is, “casting a wide net”. The choice is yours. Our presentation, however, is “top down”: most general domain aspects ﬁrst. Domain science & engineering marks a new area of computing science. Just as we are formalising the syntax and semantics of programming languages, so we are formalising the syntax and semantics of human-assisted domains. Just as physicists are studying the natural physical world, endowing it with mathematical models, so we, computing scientists, are studying these domains, endowing them with mathematical models. A difference between the endeavours of physicists and ours lies in the tools: the physics models are based on classical mathematics, differential equations and integrals, etc.; our models are based on mathematical logic, set theory, and algebra. Where physicists thus classically use a variety of differential and integral calculi to model the physical world, we shall be using the analysis & description calculi presented in this chapter to model primarily artefactual domains. As we shall see, in several examples, there is, however, a need for describing a number of domain aspects both on control theory and computing science grounds – yet the two theories underlying these description tools need be uniﬁed. At the time of writing this monograph such a unifying theory has yet to emerge.

3.4 External Qualities
Deﬁnition: 29 External Quality: By an external quality of an endurant we shall, initially, mean a property that is manifest, one that can be touched or seen,generally, one that “forms” the endurable entities of a domain. More generally, by an external quality of an endurant we shall mean an abstract property about a collection of manifest entities, like a structure of manifest entities, or a structure of abstracted such entities
A Road Transport System, II: Manifest External Qualities
Example 9 Our intention is that the manifest external qualities of a road transport system are those of its roads, their hubs6i.e., road (or street) intersections, and their links, i.e., the roads (streets) between hubs, and vehicles, i.e., automobiles – that ply the roads – the buses, trucks, private cars, bicycles, etc.
A Road Transport System, II: Abstract External Qualities
Example 10 Examples of what could be considered abstract external qualities of a road transport domain are: the aggregate of all hubs and all links, the aggregate of all buses, say into bus companies, the aggregate of all bus companies into public transport, and the aggregate of all vehicles into a department of vehicles. Some of these aggregates may, at ﬁrst be treated as abstract. Subsequently, in our further analysis & description we may decide to consider some of them as concretely manifested in, for example, actual departments of roads
Method Step 2 External Qualities:
6 We have highlighted certain endurant sort names – as they will re-appear in rather many upcoming examples.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

3.5 Entities
An important step in the process of unfolding an analysis & description of a domain is to determine which are the external qualities of entities of that domain. Our attempt, in Deﬁnition 29 on the facing page, to encircle the ‘external quality’ concept may not be fully satisfactory. We shall try “repair” that “failure to be precise” by numerous examples – and otherwise hope that some readers can suggest improved deﬁnitions .
We refer to Fig. 3.1 on the next page where a largest dashed-line “upper left” box indicate, in a way, the concepts entailed by external qualities.

3.5 Entities
A core concept of domain modelling is that of an entity.
Deﬁnition: 30 Entity: By an entity we shall understand a phenomenon, i.e., something that can be observed, i.e., be seen or touched by humans, or that can be conceived as an abstraction of an entity; alternatively, a phenomenon is an entity, if it exists, it is “being”, it is that which makes a “thing” what it is: essence, essential nature [268, Vol. I, pg.665]
Analysis Predicate Prompt 1 is entity:
The domain analyser analyses “things” (θ) into either entities or non-entities. The method provides the domain analysis prompt:
is entity – where is entity(θ) holds if θ is an entity
is entity is said to be a prerequisite prompt for all other prompts. Prompts, whether analysis or description prompts, are aid´e-memoires; they are not program constructs, they can not be deﬁned mathematically8; think of them as written on the wall of your working place, there to remind you of what you should remember to do.
Method Step 3 “What can be Described”:
A next step in the development of a domain analyser & describer is to decide on what can be described. Both with respect to the universe of discourse and with respect to every subsequently identiﬁed entity. The is entity analysis prompt is the tool used to prompt that analysis and decision. The domain analysers has great leeway here. They can, perhaps rather arbitrarily, some would say, magisterially, decide on leaving out phenomena for further treatment, phenomena that others would say can be described. An excuse for exclusion could be that the domain analysers can claim that the phenomenon is not relevant to their inquiry .
To sum up: An entity is what we can analyse and describe using the analysis & description prompts outlined in this chapter. Other words for ‘entity’ are: ‘material object’ or ‘thing’. Since we shall be needing the term ‘material’ for a speciﬁc class of entities, and since the term ‘object’ is already heavily overloaded, we shall just use the term ‘entity’. The entities that we are concerned with are those with which Kai Sørlander’s Philosophy is likewise concerned. They are the ones that are unavoidable in any description of any possible world. And then, which are those entities ? In both [345] and [348] Kai Sørlander rationally deduces that these entities must be in space and time, must satisfy laws of physics – like those of Newton and Einstein, but among them are also living species: plants and animals and hence humans. The living species, besides still being in space and time, and satisfying laws of physics, must satisfy further properties.
marks the end of a analysis prompt deﬁnition. 8 See however [62, 65] where we do suggest an underlying mathematical model of domains and give prompts a semantics.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
3 DOMAINS – A Taxonomy External Qualities
Phenomena of Natural and Artefactual Universes of Discourse
Entities = Describables
Perdurants Perdurants Endurants
Discrete Endurants External Qualities
Single Sort Part Sets
Part−materials Conjoins
Alternative Sorts Part Sets
Material−parts−parts Conjoins
Single Sort Part Sets
Altern. Sorts Parts Sets
Unique Identifiers Mereologies Attributes
transcendental injection of endurants into perdurants
3.5.1 A Linnean, Binomial Taxonomy
9 An upper ontology (in the sense used in information science) consists of very general terms that are common across all domains [Wikipedia]. 10 We could organise the ontology differently: entities are either naturals, artefacts or living species, et cetera. If an upper node (•) satisﬁes a predicate P then all descendant nodes do likewise.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

3.5 Entities
[1.2] Entities are either endurants11 [2.1] or perdurants12 [2.2]. [2.1] Endurants are either physical13 [3.1] or living species14 [3.2]. [3.1] Physical endurants are either singular15 [4.1] or composites16 [4.2]. [4.1] Singulars are either atomic parts17 [5.1] or materials18 [5.2]. [5.1] Atomic parts are presently left further un-analysed. [5.2] Materials are presently left further un-analysed. [4.2] Composites are either deﬁnite composites19 or indeﬁnite composites20. [3.2] Living species are either plants21 [4.3] or animals22 [4.4]. [4.3] Plants are here left further un-analysed. [4.4] Animals are either humans [5.3] or other ... [5.4]. [5.3] Humans are here left further un-analysed. [5.4] Other ... is here left further un-analysed. [2.2] Perdurants are either instantaneous23 [3.3] or prolonged24 [3.4]. [3.3] Instantaneous perdurants are either actions25 [4.5] or events26 [4.6]. [4.5] We shall here leave actions further un-analysed. [4.6] We shall here leave events further un-analysed. [3.4] We shall here rename prolonged perdurants into behaviours27

3.5.2 A Cursory Overview
There are describable phenomena and there are phenomena that we cannot describe. The former we shall call entities. The entities are either endurants, “still” entities – existing in space, or are perdurants, “alive” entities – existing also in time. Endurants are either discrete or continuous – in which latter case we call them materials. Discrete endurants are physical parts, or living species, or are structures. Physical parts are either naturals, or artefacts, i.e. man-made. Natural parts are either atomic or composite parts. Man-made parts are either atomic parts, composite parts or are conjoins. In this monograph we shall refer to manmade parts as artefacts, and we shall, surprise-surprise, “collapse” our treatment of natural and artefactual
11 Cf. Defn. 31 on Page 47 12 Cf. Defn. 32 on Page 47 13 Physical endurants are such entities which can alone be justiﬁed in terms of physical laws such as Newton’s etc. 14 Living speciﬁes are such entities which, in addition to physical laws are also subject to biological laws. 15 By a singular entity we shall mean a single instance or something to be considered by itself [Merriam Webster]. 16 By a constellation we shall mean a grouping of usually two or more endurants. 17 See Sect. 3.13.1 on Page 56 18 Cf. Defn. 48 on Page 55 19 A deﬁnite composite has a given number of endurants. 20 An indeﬁnite composite has a possibly varying number of endurants. 21 See Sect. 3.11.1 on Page 54 22 See Sect. 3.11.2 on Page 54 23 An Instantaneous Perdurant occurs at a (or any) single point in time and manifests itself in a similarly instantaneous state change – where a state is the internal qualities value of any assembly of endurants. 24 A Prolonged Perdurant occurs over time, perdures for either an indeﬁnite or an inﬁnite time interval. 25 An action is an internally provoked instantaneous state change. 26 An event is an externally provoked instantaneous state change. 27 A behaviour is a set of sequences of actions, events and behaviours. 28 – like those used as the basis for plant determination according to Carl von Linn´e
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
3 DOMAINS – A Taxonomy External Qualities
Universe of Discourse
Instantaneous Living Species Physicals
Indefinite Composite
parts into just physical parts. Conjoins are either part-materials, or material-parts, or part-parts conjoins. Living Species are either plants or animals. Among animals we have the humans. Structures are structures over either a deﬁnite number of endurants of usually distinct sorts, or an indeﬁnite number of endurants of the same sort.

3.5.3 Summary
The categorisation into structures, natural parts, artefactual parts, plants, and animals is thus partly based in Sørlander’s Philosophy, partly pragmatic. The distinction between endurants and perdurants, are necessitated by Kai Sørlander’s Philosophy as entities being in space, respectively entities being in space and time. Furthermore: discrete and continuous are motivated by arguments of natural sciences; structures are purely pragmatic; plants and animals, including humans, are necessitated by Kai Sørlander’s Philosophy. The distinction between natural, physical parts, and artefacts is not necessary in Sørlander’s Philosophy, but, we claim, necessary, philosophically, in order to perform the intentional “pull”, a transcendental deduction. The distinction between part-materials, material-parts, and part-parts is pragmatic. We could have chosen another sub-ontology for artefacts. Also, from empirical observation, there seems to be no need for material-materials conjoins. In part-materials conjoins the materials are “contained within” the part; in material-parts conjoins the material, anthropomorphically speaking, “contains the parts”; and in part-parts conjoins the parts are monitored and controlled by the part. In a perceived material-materials artefact, should the material “contain” the materials ? How ?
3.5.3.1 Space and Time: Whither Entities ?
Are space and time entities ? Of course not ! They are simply abstract concepts that apply to any entity.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

3.6 Endurants and Perdurants

3.6 Endurants and Perdurants
The concepts of endurants and perdurants are not present in, that is, are not essential to Sørlander’s Philosophy. Since our departure point is that of computing science where, eventually, conventional computing performs operations on, i.e. processes data, we shall, however, introduce these two notions: endurant and perdurant. The former, in a rough sense, “corresponds” to data; the latter, similarly, to processes. Philosophers have otherwise spent quite some thoughts on endurants29 and perdurants30. It seems obvious that entities exists in space. But how do entities persist through time ? Two accounts of persistence31
are endurance theory (endurantism) and perdurance theory (perdurantism). We shall basically stay clear of these, the footnoted sources, and rely on Kai Sørlander’s Philosophy.
Method Step 4 Initial Focus is on Endurants:
A basic principle of the domain analyser & describer method is that of initially focusing on endurants. Once all we wish to know about domain endurants has been analysed and described, then we shift focus to perdurants .

3.6.1 Endurants
Deﬁnition: 31 Endurant: By an endurant we shall understand an entity that can be observed, or conceived and described, as a “complete thing” at no matter which given snapshot of time; alternatively an entity is endurant if it is capable of enduring, that is persist, “hold out” [268, Vol. I, pg.656]. Were we to “freeze” time we would still be able to observe the entire endurant
Example 11 Geography Endurants: Geography endurants are: ﬁelds, meadows, lakes, rivers, forests, hills, mountains, et cetera. Railway System Endurants: a railway system, its net, its individual tracks, switch points, trains, their individual locomotives, et cetera.
A Caveat: Please observe the following: In Example 11 we seemingly rather easily, refer to such things as ﬁelds, meadows, lakes, rivers, etc., as endurants that can be singled out from one another. It probably took mankind millenia to make this categorisation. Easier, perhaps, with the artefacts: railway net, track, locomotives, etc. These endurants were so designated by their designers, and we have kept these designations.
Analysis Predicate Prompt 2 is endurant:
The domain analyser analyses an entity, φ, into an endurant as prompted by the domain analysis prompt:
is endurant – φ is an endurant if is endurant(φ) holds.
is entity is a prerequisite prompt for is endurant

3.6.2 Perdurants
Deﬁnition: 32 Perdurant: By a perdurant we shall understand an entity for which only a fragment exists if we look at or touch them at any given snapshot in time. Were we to freeze time we would only see or touch a fragment of the perdurant [268, Vol. II, pg.1552]
29 en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Formal ontology#Endurant 30 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Formal ontology#Perdurant 31 plato.stanford.edu/entries/temporal-parts/
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
3 DOMAINS – A Taxonomy External Qualities
Example 12 Geography Perdurants: the continuous changing of the weather (meteorology); the erosion of coast lines; the rising of some land and the “sinking” of other land areas; volcano eruptions; earth quakes; et cetera. Railway System Perdurants: the ride of a train from one railway station to another; and the stop of a train at a railway station from some arrival time to some departure time
Analysis Predicate Prompt 3 is perdurant:
The domain analyser analyses an entity e into perdurants as prompted by the domain analysis prompt:
is perdurant– e is a perdurant if is perdurant(e) holds.
is entity is a prerequisite prompt for is perdurant
Occurrent, accident, continuant and happening are synonyms for perdurant. We shall, in this monograph not develop an analysis calculus for perdurants, but leave such a, to us interesting research challenge to capable readers.

3.7 Endurants: Discrete and Continuous
We decide to facilitate the modelling of two kinds of endurants: discrete endurants and continuous endurants. Discrete endurants, we allow, may contain continuous endurants.

3.7.1 Discrete Endurants
Deﬁnition: 33 Discrete Endurant: By a discrete endurant we shall understand an endurant which is separate, individual or distinct in form or concept
Analysis Predicate Prompt 4 is discrete:
The domain analyser analyses endurants, e, into discrete entities as prompted by the domain analysis prompt:
is discrete – e is discrete if is discrete(e) holds
To simplify matters we shall allow separate elements of a discrete endurant to be continuous! That is, a discrete endurant, i.e., a part, may be conjoined with a continuous endurant, a material; we refer to Sect. 3.13.3 on Page 58.
Example 13 The individual endurants of the above example of railway system endurants, Example 11 on the preceding page, were all discrete. Here are examples of discrete endurants of pipeline systems. A pipeline and its individual units: wells, pipes, valves, pumps, forks, joins, and sinks.
Caveat: Be aware of the following problem. Just because you ascribe the type name valve to a discrete endurant, e, does not “automatically” endow the so-typed entity, e, with all, or at least some of those qualities that valve values, such as you and I can agree on as being valve values, do possess. No, we have to do much more analysis for “your” naming an entity of type valve, and for that entity to indeed be what others would associate with valve values. That “much more” analysis entails ascribing a sufﬁcient number of internal qualities to what we labeled as valves, qualities such as unique identiﬁcation, mereology and attributes.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41
3.8 Physical Parts, Structures and Living Species

3.7.2 Continuous Endurants: Materials
Deﬁnition: 34 Continuous Endurant: By a continuous endurant we shall understand an endurant which is prolonged, without interruption, in an unbroken series or pattern
Analysis Predicate Prompt 5 is continuous:
The domain analyser analyses endurants e into continuous entities as prompted by the domain analysis prompt:
is continuous or is material – e is discrete if is continuous(e) (is material(e)) holds
We shall prefer to refer to continuous endurants as materials. Continuous materials are otherwise liquid, or gaseous, or plasmatic, or granular, or plant products, i.e., chopped sugar cane, threshed, or otherwise, et cetera.
Example 14 Speciﬁc examples of materials are: water, oil, gas, compressed air, etc. A container, which we consider a discrete endurant, may be conjoined with another, now continuous endurant, a material, like a gas pipeline unit may “contain” gas. We refer to Sect. 3.16.3 on Page 70.
We cover materials further in Sect. 3.12 on Page 55. Continuity shall here not be understood in the sense of mathematics. Our deﬁnition of ‘continuity’ focused on prolonged, without interruption, in an unbroken series or pattern. In that sense materials shall be seen as ‘continuous’. The mathematical notion of ‘continuity’ is an abstract one. The endurant notion of ‘continuity’ is physical one.
Method Step 5 Discrete versus Continuous:
One may question the distinction between discrete and continuous endurants. For most natural, Godgiven, and probably all man-made discrete endurants the temperature of its surroundings may decide its state of “ﬁrmness” or “ﬂuidity”! We decide here to leave this, to some, crucial aspect untreated ! .
3.8 Physical Parts, Structures and Living Species
We decide to analyse endurants into either of three kinds: physical parts, structures and living species. The distinction between the ﬁrst two is pragmatic. The distinction between these and living species is motivated in Kai Sørlander’s Philosophy.
3.8.1 Compound Endurants, “Roots” and “Siblings”
We need, in the following, to make deﬁnitions based on endurants being compounds.
Deﬁnition: 35 Compound Endurants: By a compound endurant we shall understand an endurant which can be considered as comprising two elements: a “root” and one or more, usually more, “siblings”. The “root” endurant, which is ignored for so-called endurant structures, can otherwise be said to “embody”, to “host”, the “siblings” These, the “siblings”, can be said to be sub-ordinate to the “root”, also for endurant structures These deﬁnitions may seem vague, but are in fact, sufﬁciently precise !
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
3 DOMAINS – A Taxonomy External Qualities

3.8.2 Physical Parts
Physical parts are either natural parts, or are artefactual parts, i.e. man-made. Natural and man-made parts are either atomic or composite. We additionally analyse artefacts into conjoins, i.e., compounds of a “root” part and a deﬁnite number of different sort “sibling” materials, or a “root” material and an indeﬁnite number of same-sort “sibling” parts, or a “root” part and an indeﬁnite number of same-sort “sibling” parts.
Deﬁnition: 38 Physical Parts: By a physical part we shall understand a discrete endurant existing in time and subject to laws of physics, including the causality principle and gravitational pulla
a This characterisation is the result of our study of relations between philosophy and computing science, notably inﬂuenced by Kai Sørlander’s Philosophy. We refer to our research report [72, www.imm.dtu.dk/˜dibj/2018/philosophy/ﬁlo.pdf].
Analysis Predicate Prompt 6 is physical part: The domain analyser analyses “things” (e) into physical part. The method provides the domain analysis prompt:
is physical part – where is physical part(e) holds if e is a physical part
Physical parts are going to be the “workhorse” of our analyses & descriptions of artefactual domains.
A Rough Sketch Domain Endurant Description
Example 15 The example is that of the production of rum. From
92 the sowing, watering, and tending to of sugar cane plants; 93 via the “burning” of these prior to harvest; 94 the harvest; 95 the collection of harvest from sugar cane ﬁelds to the 96 the chopping, crushing, (and sometimes repeated) boiling, cooling and centrifuging of sugar cane when making sugar and molasses (into A, B, and low grade batches); 97 the fermentation, with water and yeast, producing a ‘wash’; 98 the (pot still or column still) distilling of the wash into rum; 99 the aging of rum in oak barrels; 100 the charcoal ﬁltration of rum; 101 the blending of rum; 102 the bottling of rum; 103 the preparation of cases of rum for sales/export; and 104 the transportation away from the rum distiller of the rum.
Some comments on Example 15: Each of the enumerated items above is phrased in terms of perdurants. Behind each such perdurant lies some endurant. That is, in English, “every noun can be verbed”, and vice-versa. So we anticipate the transcendence, from endurants to perdurants. Section 3.13 on Page 55 continues our treatment of physical parts.

3.8.3 Structures
Deﬁnition: 39 Endurant Structure: By an endurant structure, or just , we shall understand a discrete endurant whose “root” element the domain engineer chooses to ignore, i.e., to not endow with internal qualities such as unique identiﬁers, mereology and attributes; but whose “siblings” are described as consisting of one or more discrete endurants
Analysis Predicate Prompt 7 is structure: The domain analyser analyses “things” (e) into structures. The method provides the domain analysis prompt:
is structure – where is structure(e) holds if e is a structure
We refer to Sect. 3.10 for further analysis of structures into set and composite structures.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

3.9 Natural Parts and Artefacts

3.8.4 Living Species
Living Species are either plants or animals. Among animals we have the humans.
Deﬁnition: 40 Living Species, I: By a living species we shall understand a discrete endurant, subject to laws of physics, and additionally subject to causality of purpose
a See Footnote a on the preceding page of Deﬁnition 38 on the facing page.
Analysis Predicate Prompt 8 is living species: The domain analyser analyses “things” (e) into living species. The method provides the domain analysis prompt:
is living species – where is living species(e) holds if e is a living species
We refer to Sect. 3.11 for further treatment of living species.

3.9 Natural Parts and Artefacts
We shall examine two kinds of physical parts: natural and man-made, i.e., artefactual, parts.
Example 16 The geography examples (Example 11 on Page 47) are all natural parts. The railway system examples (Example 11 on Page 47) are all artefacts

3.9.1 Natural Parts
Deﬁnition: 41 Natural Parts: Natural parts are not artefactuals, but are given by nature; are in space and time; are subject to the laws of physics, and also subject to the principle of causality and gravitational pull Natural parts are parts which the domain engineer chooses to endow with all three internal qualities: unique identiﬁcation, mereology, and one or more attributes
Analysis Predicate Prompt 9 is natural part: The domain analyser analyses “things” (e) into natural parts. The method provides the domain analysis prompt:
is natural part – where is natural part(e) holds if e is a natural part
Example 17 Natural Parts: River Systems Further examples of natural parts are: a river system
– with its short or long stretches of water sources (springs, glaciers, meadows or even lakes) emerging into brooks or streams or rivers; winding or straight brook, stream and river sections; lakes; waterfalls; conﬂuences of brooks, streams and rivers into appropriate ones of these; and divergences of either ones of these into appropriate ones of these
3.9.2 Artefacts – Man-made Parts
Deﬁnition: 42 Man-made Parts: Artefacts: Artefacts are man-made either discrete or continuous endurants. In this section we shall only consider discrete endurants. Man-made continuous endurants are not treated separately but are lumped with natural materials. Artefacts are subject to the laws of physics, and are parts which, like for natural parts, the domain engineer chooses to endow with all three internal qualities: unique identiﬁcation, mereology, and one or more attributes
Analysis Predicate Prompt 10 is artefact: The domain analyser analyses “things” (e) into artefact. The method provides the domain analysis prompt:
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
3 DOMAINS – A Taxonomy External Qualities
is artefact – where is artefact(e) holds if e is an artefact
Example 18 Artefactual Parts: Financial Service Industry A further example of man-made parts
are those of a ﬁnancial service industry – taken here in a wide sense: (a) customers of any of the below; (b-d) banks: savings & loan, commercial and investment banks; (e) foreign exchange services; (f) insurance; (g-h) stock brokers and exchanges; (i) [other] commodities exchanges, (j) credit unions; (k) credit card companies; (l) accountancy companies; (m) consumer ﬁnance companies; (n) investment funds; and (o-. . . ) government and international overseeing agencies (national banks, The World Bank, International Monetary Fund (IMF), European Central Bank (ECB), etc
We shall assume, cf. Sect. 4.4 [Attributes], that artefacts all come with an attribute of kind intent, that is, a set of purposes for which the artefact was constructed, and for which it is intended to serve.

3.9.3 A Pragmatic Decision
We now make a rather drastic decision. It is a pragmatic decision, that is, it is not motivated by concerns of syntax, nor is it motivated by concerns of semantics. It is motivated by concerns of usage. The decision is to henceforth not distinguish between natural and artefactual endurants. We justify the decision as follows: All of the domains we have researched and engineered, viz. [80], are signiﬁcantly characterised by their artefacts. All of their domain descriptions focus exclusively on artefacts. We have ﬁnally, experimentally, found that a presence of natural parts would not alter the description “materially”!
3.10 Structures [Conceptual Physical Parts]

3.10.1 General
Structures are “conceptual, composite endurants”. A structure “gathers” one or more endurants under “one umbrella”, often simplifying a presentation of some elements of a domain description. Sometimes, in our domain modelling, we choose to model an endurant as a structure, sometimes as a composite part; it all depends on what we wish to focus on in our domain model. Thus we choose, when doing so, to model endurants as structures for pragmatic reasons. As such structures are “compounds” where we are interested only in the (external and internal) qualities of the elements, the “siblings”, of the compound, but not in the qualities of the structure, i.e., the “root”, itself.
Transport System Structures
Example 19 A transport system is modelled as structured into a road net structure and an automobile structure. The road net structure is then structured as a pair: a structure of hubs and a structure of links. These latter structures are then modelled as set of hubs, respectively links.
Structures versus Composites
Example 20 We could have modelled the road net structure as a composite part with unique identity, mereology and attributes which could then serve to model a road net authority. We could have modelled the automobile structure as a composite part with unique identity, mereology and attributes which could then serve to model a department of vehicles
Whether to analyse & describe a discrete endurant into a structure or a physical part is a matter of choice. If we choose to analyse a discrete endurant into a physical part then it is because we are interested in endowing the part with internal qualities, the unique identiﬁers, mereology and one or more attributes. If we choose to analyse a discrete endurant into a structure then it is because we are not interested in
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41
3.11 Living Species – Plants and Animals
endowing the endurant with qualities. When we choose that an endurant sort should be modelled as a part sort with unique identiﬁcation, mereology and proper attributes, then it is because we eventually shall consider the part sort as being the basis for transcendentally deduced behaviours.

3.10.2 Composite Structures
Deﬁnition: 43 Composite Structure: By a composite structure we shall understand a discrete endurant which the domain engineer chooses to describe as consisting of a deﬁnite number of discrete “sibling” endurants of usually distinct sorts but to not endow the “root” element with internal qualities such as unique identiﬁers, mereology and attributes
Analysis Predicate Prompt 11 is composite structure: The domain analyser analyses “things” (e) into composite structures. The method provides the domain analysis prompt:
is composite structure – where is composite structure(e) holds if e is a composite structure

3.10.3 Set Structures
Deﬁnition: 44 Set Structure: By a set structure we shall understand a discrete endurant which the domain engineer chooses to describe as consisting of an indeﬁnite number of discrete “sibling” endurants of the same sort, and to not endow its “root” element with internal qualities such as unique identiﬁers, mereology and attributes
Analysis Predicate Prompt 12 is set structure: The domain analyser analyses “things” (e) into set structures. The method provides the domain analysis prompt:
is set structure – where is set structure(e) holds if e is a set structure
3.11 Living Species – Plants and Animals
We refer to Sect. 3.8.4 for our ﬁrst characterisation (Page 51) of the concept of living species32: a discrete endurant existing in time, subject to laws of physics, and additionally subject to causality of purpose.33
Deﬁnition: 45 Living Species, II: Living species must have some form they can be developed to reach; which they must be causally determined to maintain. This development and maintenance must further engage in an exchange of matter with an environment. It must be possible that living species occur in one of two forms: one form which is characterised by development, form and exchange; another form which, additionally, can be characterised by the ability to purposeful movement The ﬁrst we call plants, the second we call animals
It is appropriate here to mention Carl Linnaeus (1707–1778). He was a Swedish botanist, zoologist, and physician who formalised binomial nomenclature, the modern system of naming organisms. He is known as the “father of modern taxonomy”. We refer to http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/20771.
32 See analysis prompt 8 on Page 51. 33 See Footnote a on Page 50.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
3 DOMAINS – A Taxonomy External Qualities

3.11.1 Plants
Example 21 Although we have not yet come across domains for which the need to model the living species of plants were needed, we give some examples anyway: grass, tulip, rhododendron, oak tree.
Analysis Predicate Prompt 13 is plant: The domain analyser analyses “things” (ℓ) into a plant. The method provides the domain analysis prompt:
is plant – where is plant(ℓ) holds if ℓis a plant
The predicate is living species(ℓ) is a prerequisite for is plant(ℓ).

3.11.2 Animals
Deﬁnition: 46 Animal: We refer to the initial deﬁnition of living species above – while emphasizing the following traits: (i) a form that animals can be developed to reach and (ii) causally determined to maintain through (iii) development and maintenance in an exchange of matter with an environment, and (iv) ability to purposeful movement
Analysis Predicate Prompt 14 is animal: The domain analyser analyses “things” (ℓ) into an animal. The method provides the domain analysis prompt:
is animal – where is animal(ℓ) holds if ℓis an animal
The predicate is living species(ℓ) is a prerequisite for is animal(ℓ).
Example 22 Although we have not yet come across domains for which the need to model the living species of animals, in general, were needed, we give some examples anyway: A band of musicians, a swarm of ﬂies, a bunch of crooks, a crew of sailors, a gang of outlaws, a group of people, a herd of cattle, a mob of hair, a pack of dogs, a ﬂock of geese, a pride of lions, and a school of dolphins.

3.11.2.1 Humans
Deﬁnition: 47 Human: A human (a person) is an animal, cf. Deﬁnition 46, with the additional properties of having language, being conscious of having knowledge (of its own situation), and responsibility
Analysis Predicate Prompt 15 is human: The domain analyser analyses “things” (ℓ) into a human. The method provides the domain analysis prompt:
is human – where is human(ℓ) holds if ℓis a human
The predicate is animal(ℓ) is a prerequisite for is human(ℓ). We refer to [72, Sects. 10.4–10.5] for a speciﬁc treatment of living species, animals and humans, and to [72] in general for the philosophy background for rationalising the treatment of living species, animals and humans. We have not, in our many experimental domain modelling efforts had occasion to model humans; or rather: we have modelled, for example, automobiles as possessing human qualities, i.e., “subsuming humans”. We have found, in these experimental domain modelling efforts that we often confer anthropomorphic qualities on artefacts, that is, that these artefacts have human characteristics. You, the reader are reminded that when some programmers try to explain their programs they do so using such phrases as and here the program does ... so-and-so !
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41
3.13 Atomic, Compound and Conjoin Parts

3.12 Continuous Endurants: Materials
Deﬁnition: 48 Material: By a material we shall understand a continuous endurant
We shall simplify our treatment of materials. We model a material as potentially consisting of an amalgam of one or more substances of different sorts. So a continuous endurant is a “single” material.34 Composite physical parts may be conjoined with materials: natural parts may “contain” natural and artefactual materials, artefacts may “contain” natural and artefactual materials. We leave it to the reader to provide analysis predicates for natural and artefactual “materials”.
Natural and Man-made Materials
Example 23 A natural part, say a land area, may contain glaciers, springs, rivers, lakes, and border seas. An artefact, say an automobile, usually contains gasoline, lubrication oil, engine cooler liquid and window screen washer water.
Material substances are either liquid, like water, sewage, or oil; or gaseous, like natural gas; or plasmatic – a combination of granular and liquid forms, like blood; or granular, like iron ore, sand, or pebbles (stones, etc.); or agricultural, like sugar cane, chopped wood, grain, etc.
3.13 Atomic, Compound and Conjoin Parts
A distinguishing quality of natural and artefactual parts is whether they are atomic (Sect. 3.13.1) or compound or conjoins (Sects. 3.13.2)–3.13.3). Please note that we shall, in the following, examine the concept of parts in quite some detail. This is a choice. The choice is based on pragmatics. It is still the domain analyser cum describers’ choice whether to consider a discrete endurant a compound or a conjoin part or a structure. If the domain engineer wishes to investigate the details of a discrete endurant then the domain engineer must choose to model35 the discrete endurant as a part. If not, then as a structure,
Non-atomic Parts: Non-atomic parts are analysed, we suggest, into
either compound endurants [composites or sets] (Sect. 3.13.2.1 on Page 57) or conjoins.
Compound sets are further analysed into
either simple, one part sort sets (Sect. 3.15.2.2.1 on Page 63) or several alternative part sort sets (Sect. 3.15.2.2.2 on Page 64).
Conjoins, (Sect. 3.13.3 on Page 58), are further analysed and described into:
part-materials conjoins (Sect. 3.15.4.1 on Page 64 and 3.16.3.1 on Page 70), material-parts-parts conjoins (Sect. 3.15.4.2 on Page 64 and 3.16.3.2 on Page 71) and part-parts conjoins (Sect. 3.15.4.3 on Page 65 and 3.16.3.3 on Page 72).
We thus distinguish between seven kinds of parts:
(0) atomic, compounds: (1) either composites, or sets – and within sets (2) either single sort part sets
(3) or alternative sorts parts sets; or conjoins: (4) part-materials, (5) material-parts-parts and (6) part-parts.
34 Attributes of that “single” material may then reveal how it is (chemically or otherwise) composed from distinct substances. 35 We use the term ‘to model’ interchangeably with the phrase ‘to analyse & describe’; similarly a model is used interchangeably with an analysis & description.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
3 DOMAINS – A Taxonomy External Qualities
Our choice is one of pragmatics. It would sometimes be awkward to model endurants without the facility of concrete sets; and, using the conjoin modelling concept reveals intention ! We shall have more to say about this in time.
Atomic and Conjoin Parts
Example 24 We shall here hint at some examples. In modelling certain domains, given some further unspeciﬁed context, we may choose to model consumers, retailers, wholesalers and consumer product manufacturers as atomic, while the market is modelled as a part-parts conjoins of sets of consumers, retailers, wholesalers and consumer product manufacturers. In some other context we may choose otherwise ! Along another line wells, pipes, pumps, valves, forks joins and sinks of an oil pipeline system are individually modelled as part-materials conjoins and the oil pipeline system as a composite of sets of these part-materials conjoins – each part-materials conjoin consisting of the overall part-materials conjoin, an atomic part and a deﬁnite set of materials of different sorts. Similarly for canal systems, waste management, rum production and water management systems (as in The Netherlands). And ﬁnally we may model, as a material-parts conjoin, air trafﬁc as a single material-parts conjoin consisting of an atomic part (say the air trafﬁc monitor & advisory authority) and a concrete set of distinct aircraft parts. Similarly for ocean ship monitor & advisory authorities et cetera.

3.13.1 Atomic Parts
Deﬁnition: 49 Atomic Part: Atomic parts are those which, in a given context, are deemed to not consist of meaningful, separately observable proper sub-parts. A sub-part is a part
We emphasize the term ‘demeed’. The domain analyser & describer is the one who is ‘deeming’. It is all a choice.
Analysis Predicate Prompt 16 is atomic:
The domain analyser analyses a discrete endurant, i.e., a part p into an atomic endurant:
is atomic: p is an atomic endurant if is atomic(p) holds
is discrete is a prerequisite prompt of is atomic. The is atomic analysis prompt comes in two variants: is natural atomic and is artefactual atomic. Similarly for the is composite analysis prompt: is natural composite and is artefactual composite. In the following we shall often omit the inﬁx natural or artefactual .
Atomic Road Net Parts
Example 25 From one point of view all of the following can be considered atomic parts: hubs, links36, and automobiles.

3.13.2 Compound Parts
We, pragmatically, distinguish between compound-, i.e., Cartesian-product-like, and set-oriented, i.e., parts. We shall treat both as concrete type sorts.
Deﬁnition: 50 Compound Part: Compound parts are those which are either composite parts or are sets of parts
Analysis Predicate Prompt 17 is compound:
36 Hub ≡street intersection; link ≡street segments with no intervening hubs.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41
3.13 Atomic, Compound and Conjoin Parts
The domain analyser analyses a discrete endurant, i.e., a part p into a compound:
is compound: p is a compound if is compound(p) holds

3.13.2.1 Composite Parts
Deﬁnition: 51 Composite Part: Composite parts are those which, in a given context, are deemed to meaningfully consist of separately observable a [“root”] part and a deﬁnite number of proper [“sibling”] sub-parts of distinct sorts
We emphasize the term ‘demeed’. The domain analyser & describer is the one who is ‘deeming’. It is all a choice.
Analysis Predicate Prompt 18 is composite:
The domain analyser analyses a discrete endurant, i.e., a part p into a composite endurant:
is composite: p is a composite endurant if is composite(p) holds
is physical part is a prerequisite prompt of is composite.
Composite Automobile Parts
Example 26 We refer to Example 25 on the preceding page. We there viewed automobiles as atomic parts. From another point of view we shall here understand automobiles as composite parts: the engine train, the chassis, the car body, the doors and the wheels. These can again be considered physical parts.

3.13.2.2 Set Parts
Whereas compounds consist of a deﬁnite number of parts of distinct sorts, sets consist of an indeﬁnite number of parts of some sort[s].
Deﬁnition: 52 Set Part: Set parts are those which, in a given context, are deemed to meaningfully consist of separately observable a [“root”] part and an indeﬁnite number of proper [“sibling”] sub-parts of the same sort
We emphasize the term ‘demeed’. The domain analyser & describer is the one who is ‘deeming’. It is all a choice.
Analysis Predicate Prompt 19 is set:
The domain analyser analyses a discrete endurant, i.e., a part p into a set endurant:
is set: p is a composite endurant if is set(p) holds
is physical part is a prerequisite prompt of is set.
Example 27 A railway track can be considered a set of railway units – usually themselves considered atomic parts. A library can be considered a set of books – usually themselves considered atomic parts. A container line can be considered a set of container vessels – usually themselves considered non-atomic or conjoin parts.
We distinguish between two kinds of sets. Sets consisting of elements of the same sort, and set consisting of elements of two or more, alternative sorts.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
3 DOMAINS – A Taxonomy External Qualities

3.13.2.2.1 Simple One-Sort Sets
Deﬁnition: 53 Simple One-Sort Sets: Simple one-sort sets are those which, in a given context, are deemed to meaningfully consist of separately observable a [“root”] part and an indeﬁnite number of proper [“sibling”] sub-parts of the same sort
Analysis Predicate Prompt 20 is single sort set:
The domain analyser analyses a discrete endurant, i.e., a part p into a set endurant:
is single sort set: p is a composite endurant if is single sort set(p) holds
is set(p) is a prerequisite prompt of is single sort set(p).
Simple One-Sort Sets
Example 28 The books of library can be considered a set of same sort books.

3.13.2.2.2 Alternative Sorts Sets
Deﬁnition: 54 Alternative Sorts Sets: Alternative, several distinct sort sets are those which, in a given context, are deemed to meaningfully consist of separately observable a [“root”] part and an indeﬁnite number of proper [“sibling”] sub-parts of a deﬁnite number of two or more distinct sorts
Analysis Predicate Prompt 21 is alternative sorts set:
The domain analyser analyses a discrete endurant, i.e., a part p into a set endurant:
is alternative sorts set: p is a composite endurant if is alternative sorts set(p) holds
is set(p) is a prerequisite prompt of is alternative sorts set(p).
Alternative Sorts Sets
Example 29 The rail units of a rail track can be considered a set of parts of different sorts: linear rail units, single switch point rail units, double switch point rail units, terminal units, et cetera,

3.13.3 Conjoins
Deﬁnition: 55 Conjoin: By a conjoin we shall here understand a physical part which can be understood to properly embody two or three further physical parts
We say that these “further” parts are conjoined. We suggest three kinds of conjoins: part-materials conjoins, material-parts-parts conjoins and part-parts conjoins. We have decided to include these three endurant categories for the following reason: their use, the fact that the domain analyser & describer chooses to model a concept as a conjoin, shall reveal an intent. The intents are these. For part-materials conjoins and part-parts conjoins the two elements of the conjoin serve two very related, i.e., conjoined, rˆoles: (a) the part as the overall monitor (and potential controller), (b) the materials or parts as that which is being monitored and to some extent controlled by the part. For material-parts-parts conjoins the three elements (the material (a), respectively the parts (b) and the parts (c)) serve three related, i.e., conjoined, rˆoles: (a) the material as the “carrier” of the (b) the parts whose raison d’etre is that they can “inhabit” the material and (c) the parts whose raison d’etre is that they can “service” the former parts, i.e., (b). We shall think of the material (a) as if it was an atomic part but such that it ’embodies’ the material.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41
3.13 Atomic, Compound and Conjoin Parts
Analysis Predicate Prompt 22 is conjoin:
The domain analyser analyses endurants e into conjoin entities as prompted by the domain analysis prompt:
is conjoin – e is a conjoin if is conjoin(e) holds

3.13.3.1 Part-Materials Conjoins
Deﬁnition: 56 Part-Materials Conjoin: By a part-materials conjoin we shall understand an endurant which is a composition of a [“root”] part, and one or more (intentionally) distinct [“sibling”] materials
The pragmatics of part-materials conjoins is that they serve to model such domains as water & ﬂood management – as in The Netherlands State Water Management Authority37; canal systems, i.e., artefactual waterways, typically with locks – as in, for example the Panama Canal Authority38; water, oil, gas and other pipelines – as in, for example the (now defunct) Nabucco West Pipeline Proposal39; waste management – as in the European Union Waste Management Project40; uni-ﬂow production systems – as in, for example, the production of spirits, like whiskey, rum, etc., and in industrial manufacturing. Where road transport nets typically be modelled as bi-directed, cyclic graphs, the above ‘conjoin nets’ typically can be modelled as directed, acyclic graphs41. A difference between water & ﬂood management and canal systems is that the former primarily manages the water level, by means of pumps, whereas the latter primarily manages the passage of anywhere from [300 tons] barges to [300.000 tons] vessels, by means of locks. Caveat: We could have stipulated that conjoins consist of one or more [“root”] physical parts, etc., but it appears, from modelling experience, that to settle on exactly one makes modelling “easier” !
Analysis Predicate Prompt 23 is part materials conjoin:
The domain analyser analyses endurants e into part-materials conjoin entities as prompted by the domain analysis prompt:
is part materials conjoin – e is a part-materials conjoin if is part materials conjoin(e) holds
We emphasize that the domain analyser & describer is making a choice. The domain analyser & describer is the one who ‘chooses’. The context and aims of the domain modelling effort decides which choices to make.
Part-Material Conjoins: Pipelines, I
Example 30 A pipeline consists of a number of conjoined pipeline units: The pipeline units (each with their “container” and some liquid). A pipeline unit is either a well (with some, zero, or a maximum of liquid), a pump, pumping or not (with some, zero, or a maximum of liquid), a pipe (with some, zero, or a maximum of liquid), a valve, closed or partially or fully open (with some, zero, or a maximum of liquid), a fork diverting a line into two (with some, zero, or a maximum of liquid) and a join merging two lines into one (with some, zero, or a maximum of liquid), a sink (with some, zero, or a maximum of liquid), Liquid ﬂows in one direction, from wells to sinks. There are no cycles.
Part-Material Conjoins: Canals with Locks, I
37 www.rijkswaterstaat.nl/english/index.aspx 38 www.pancanal.com/eng 39 en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nabucco pipeline 40 www.urban-waste.eu/project 41 – although waste management systems may contain some cyclicity
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
3 DOMAINS – A Taxonomy External Qualities
Example 31 A system of canals with locks consists of a number of canal units. A canal unit is a conjoined endurant consisting of a pair: a discrete canal unit and a material – some [“muddy”] water ! Canal units serve to convey canal vessels (pleasure boats, barges) in either direction of the canal system. Discrete canal units are either linear (or, for that matter a curved) stretches of a canal; fork/join: diverting/joining one stretch of canal into two, respectively two into one – forks/joins connect linear canal units whose water levels “agree”; or lock sequences of one or more single locks. A lock sequence connects two linear canal units whose water levels “disagree”. A single lock allows canal vessels to be lowered/raised in order to be conveyed into next single lock or linear canal units. Single locks may either be open in one or in the opposite direction, for a vessel in the single lock to sail out of the single lock in that direction or into the single lock from the opposite direction, or they may be closed, that is, in the process of lowering or raising its water level. Etc., etc.
Part-Materials Conjoins: Waste Management, I
Example 32 Waste management [systems] are about the transport and treatment of waste. Waste can, for example, be non-clean water, sewage, chemical side-products, or other. Transport can, for example, be pipes, barrels, conveyor belts, or other. Treatment can, for example, be removing undesired materials from non-clean water, sewage and chemicals resulting in at least clean water or desired chemical and one or more waste products. A waste treatment system consists, typically, of a number of conjoin units: sources of the waste, waste transport networks, where some segments of these networks converge on treatment plants, from which emerges two or more waste and non-waste networks.
In this monograph we shall exemplify excerpts of many different kinds of (of a category of) domains. A sub-category is that of domains primarily “populated” with conjoins such as those listed in the main opening, the pragmatics, paragraph of this section. We refer to Sect. 3.16.3 on Page 70, Example 37 on Page 71, Sect. 4.3.7 on Page 94, Sect. 4.4.8 on Page 110 and Sect. 6.10.1 on Page 154.

3.13.3.2 Material-Parts-Parts Conjoins
Deﬁnition: 57 Material-Parts-Parts Conjoin: By a material-parts-parts conjoin we shall understand an endurant which is a composition of (a) the material-parts conjoin [“root”] material, (b) zero, one or more (intentionally) distinct ﬁxed [“sibling”] parts, and (c) zero, one or more (intentionally) distinct moving [“sibling”] parts
The pragmatics of material-parts conjoins is that they serve to model such domains as: Vessel trafﬁc on the open seas: the open seas are the material (a), i.e., the oceans, seas, great lakes and channels; vessels are the moving parts (c), they ply from harbour to harbour and sometimes on canals (the ﬁxed parts, (b)). Air trafﬁc in the sky: (a) the air space is the material; (b) airports are the ﬁxed parts; and (c) aircraft of all kinds are the moving parts.
Analysis Predicate Prompt 24 is material parts parts conjoin:
The domain analyser analyses endurants e into material-parts-parts conjoin entities as prompted by the domain analysis prompt:
is material parts parts conjoin – e is a material-parts conjoin if is material parts parts conjoin(e) holds
We again emphasize that the domain analyser & describer is making a choice. The domain analyser & describer is the one who is ‘choose’. The context and aims of the domain modelling effort decides which choices to make.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

3.14 On Discovering Endurant Sorts

3.13.3.3 Part-Parts Conjoins
Part-parts conjoins come in two forms: (i) “proper” part-parts which embody a “root” and zero one or more, but a deﬁnite number of “siblings; and (ii) a “simpliﬁed” part-parts where we ignore the “root”. It is up to the domain analyser cum describer to make the choice whether to include the “root” or not. You may think of the latter as representing a structure (the“root”) with sets of “siblings”.
Analysis Predicate Prompt 25 is part parts conjoin:
The domain analyser analyses endurants e into part-parts conjoin entities as prompted by the domain analysis prompt:
is part parts conjoin – e is a part-parts conjoin if is part parts conjoin(e) holds
Part-Parts Conjoin: Container Terminal Ports
There is the set of composite container terminal ports There is the composite part of the port itself, with its structures of sets of container vessels, structures of sets of quay side ship/quay quay cranes, structures of sets of quay crane to terminal port bay trucks, structures of sets of terminal port bays and structures of sets of container land trucks. The containers are embodied in vessel bays, on quay cranes, on bay trucks, in terminal port bays and on land trucks.
There are a set of zero, one or more container vessels: each vessel being a part-parts conjoin of the “bare” vessel, containing a part set of vessel container bays.
There is a set quay cranes, each quay crane being a part-parts conjoin of the “bare” crane ho[i]sting a part set of zero or one container part.
There is a set quay crane to terminal port bay trucks, each bay truck being a part-parts conjoin of the “bare” truck ho[i]sting a part set of zero, one or two containers.
There is a set of (vessel or terminal port) container bays. with each container bay being a structure container rows, with a container row being a structure container stack, with a container stack being a sequence containers,
There is a set of terminal port to and from customer land trucks, each such land truck being a partparts conjoin of the “bare” truck hoisting a part set of zero or one container.
We refer to [73, Container Terminals, September 2018], an experimental case study report where we used this, the atomic, composite and concrete set approach. We refer to [376, A Uniﬁed Theory of Programming approach for rTiMo] an extension of CSP, with real-time and process mobility expressivity as a promising approach.
Method Step 6 From Analysis to Description:
We have reached a stage in our unraveling an, or the, analysis calculus where it is now possible to “switch” to a, or the, description calculus. That is, here is a step of the method: to conscientiously apply description prompts. These follow in Sect. 3.16.
To prepare for the external qualities description calculi we must, however, ﬁrst review how we discover endurant sorts, Sect. 3.14, examine a notion of states, Sect. 3.18, review the unfolding ontology of endurants, Sect. ?? and introduce some endurant analysis functions (not predicates) , Sect. 3.15.

3.14 On Discovering Endurant Sorts
The subject of ‘discovery’ depends very much on whether the endurant is an artefact or a natural part,
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
3 DOMAINS – A Taxonomy External Qualities

3.14.1 On Discovering Man-made Endurants
Artefacts are man-made. Usually the designers – the engineers, the craftsmen – who make these parts start out by ascribing speciﬁc names to them. And these names become our sort names. So the α,β,γ points below are really only relevant for the analysis of natural discrete endurants.

3.14.2 On Discovering Natural Endurants
Our aim now is to present the basic principles that let the domain analyser decides on endurant sorts. We observe endurants one-by-one.
(α) Our analysis of parts concludes when we have “lifted” our examination of a particular endurant instance to the conclusion that it is of a given sort, that is, reﬂects a formal concept.
Thus there is, in this analysis, a “eureka”, a step where we shift focus from the concrete to the abstract, from observing speciﬁc endurant instances to postulating a sort: from one to the many. If e is an endurant of sort E, then we express that as: e:E. In Sect. 3.15 we shall introduce analysis functions for all the endurants of our ontology.
(β) The analyser analyses, for each of these endurants, ei, which formal concept, i.e., sort, it belongs to; let us say that it is of sort Ek; thus the sub-parts of e are of sorts {E1,E2,...,En}. Some Ek may be natural parts, other artefacts, or structures, or materials. And parts may be either atomic or composite.
The domain analyser continues to examine a ﬁnite number of other composite parts: {p j, pℓ, ..., pn}. It is then “discovered”, that is, decided, that they all consists of the same number of sub-parts {ei1,ei2,...,eim}, {ej1,ej2,...,ejm}, {eℓ1,eℓ2,...,eℓm}, ..., {en1,en2,...,enm}, of the same, respective, endurant sorts.
(γ) It is therefore concluded, that is, decided, that {ei,ej,eℓ,...,en} are all of the same endurant sort E with observable part sub-sorts {E1,E2,...,Em}.
Above we have type-font-highlighted three sentences: (α,β,γ). When you analyse what they “prescribe” you will see that they entail a “depth-ﬁrst search” for endurant sorts. The β sentence says it rather directly: “The analyser analyses, for each of these endurants, pk, which formal concept, i.e., endurant sort it belongs to.” To do this analysis in a proper way, the analyser must (“recursively”) analyse structures into substructures, parts and materials, and parts “down” to their atomicity. For the parts (whether natural or manmade) and materials of structures the analyser cum describer decides on their sort, and work (“recurse”) their way “back”, through possibly intermediate endurants, to the pks. Of course, when the analyser starts by examining atomic parts and materials, then their endurant structure and part analysis “recursion” is not necessary.
Thus the discovery of natural parts and natural materials is very much of the kind that the Swedish 18th century botanist, zoologist, and physician Carl von Linn´e (Carl Linnaeus, 1707–1778) who formulated the so-called binomial nomenclature, the system of naming organisms42. Linn´e is also referred to af “the father of taxonomy”.

3.14.3 An Aside: Taxonomy in Botanics and Zoology
For the discovery of natural parts we must therefore really refer to the taxonomy disciplines of botanics https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Botanyand zoology https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zoology. The term systematics, en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Systematics, is, more or less, synonymous with taxonomy, en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plant taxonomy. Typically, for new plant species to be
42 Linnæus, Systema Naturae, around 1735. Systema naturæ, sive regna tria naturæ systematice proposita per classes, ordines, genera, & species. pp. [112]. Lugduni Batavorum. (Haak), See www.biodiversitylibrary.org/item/15373#page/2/mode/1up
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

3.15 Endurant Analysis Function Prompts
identiﬁed botanists make use of a herbarium, en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Herbarium. Perhaps geographers, for example, should consider establishing digital herbaria, en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual herbarium, for geographical matters. And, similarly, for each of the more-or-less separately identiﬁable man-made domains – some of which are listed in [80].

3.15 Endurant Analysis Function Prompts
We need informally deﬁne some analysis functions to be used in the domain description prompt deﬁnitions; one, basically, for each non-atomic endurant sort.

3.15.1 Introductory Remarks: On the Non-trivial Nature of Analysis
In this section, i.e., Sect. 3.15, we shall characterise43 a number of analysis functions. These analysis functions apply to endurants, e, such that if is category(e) then we analyse category(e) with respect to its sorts: which are they ? This analysis is at the core of domain analysis. It is far from that straightforward. Many possibilities offer themselves. Several model choices are abundant. More than one may lead to acceptable, reasonable models. Some may lead to awkward models. This is so since the domain analyser “moves” from the informal, well, in principle, non-formalisable world of “reality” to the formal world of a domain model. The presentation, below, of the various analysis functions follows the “tree-like” structure of Fig. 3.1 on Page 44, in a left-to-right, depth-ﬁrst traversal – except that we treat structures before conjoins.

3.15.2 Analyse Compound Parts

3.15.2.1 Analyse Composite Parts
Analysis Function Prompt 1 analyse composite parts:
The domain analyser analyses physical parts into a composite part The method provides the domain analysis prompt:
analyse composite parts directs the domain analyser to observe the deﬁnite number of values and corresponding distinct sorts of the part.
value analyse composite parts(e) ≡((e1,...,en),(❝E1,...,En ❞))
The ordering, ((e1,...,en),(❝E1,...,En ❞)), is arbitrary.

3.15.2.2 Analyse Part Sets

3.15.2.2.1 Analyse Single Sort Part Sets
Analysis Function Prompt 2 analyse single sort part set:
The domain analyser analyses physical parts into single sort part sets. The method provides the domain analysis prompt:
analyse single sort part set directs the domain analyser to observe the the single sort part set of values and their single sort.
value analyse single sort part sets(e) ≡({p1,p2,...,pn},❝P ❞)
43 – that is, not deﬁne [and certainly not formally so, since that is not possible]
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
3 DOMAINS – A Taxonomy External Qualities

3.15.2.2.2 Analyse Alternative Sorts Part Sets
Analysis Function Prompt 3 analyse alternative sorts part set:
The domain analyser analyses physical parts into alternative sorts part sets. The method provides the domain analysis prompt:
analyse alternative sorts part set directs the domain analyser to observe the values and corresponding sorts of the part.
value analyse alternative sorts part set(e) ≡((p1,❝E1 ❞),...,(pn,❝En ❞))
The set of parts, of different sorts, may have more than one element, p, p′,..., p′′ being of the same sort Ei.

3.15.3 Analyse Structures
Structures are like compounds: they are either composite or are set structures, in which latter case they are either single sort part sets or are alternative sorts part sets. As such we treat them as if they were compounds but shall not later, in Chapter4, analyse their “root” element for possible internal qualities as they have no “root” element !

3.15.4 Analyse Conjoins

3.15.4.1 Analyse Part-Materials Conjoins
Analysis Function Prompt 4 analyse part materials:
The domain analyser analyses a conjoin into a part-materials conjoin. The method provides the domain analysis prompt:
analyse part materials directs the domain analyser to observe the values and sorts of the part and the materials:
value analyse part materials(e) ≡((p,❝P ❞),{(m1,❝M 1 ❞),...,(mm,❝M m ❞)})

3.15.4.2 Analyse Material-Parts-Parts Conjoins
Analysis Function Prompt 5 analyse material parts parts:
The domain analyser analyses a conjoin into a material-parts-parts conjoin. The method provides the domain analysis prompt:
analyse material parts parts directs the domain analyser to observe the values and sorts of the material, the “ﬁxed” parts and the “movable” parts.
value analyse material parts parts(e)≡((m,{fp1,...fpm},{mp1,...,mpn}),(❝M,fP,mP ❞))
Elaboration 1 Type, Values and Type Names: The endurant analysis functions, this and the below, all illustrate quoting
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

3.16 Calculating Sort Describers
Material and Parts of Transports
Example 34 We exemplify three kinds of transport.
Air Transport: The material of a air transport is an airspace, an EXTENT.44 The ﬁxed parts of air transport is a set of two or more airports. The movable parts of air transport is a set of zero, one or more aircraft. Ocean-Shipping: The material of ocean-shipping is the oceans, seen as one, an EXTENT. The ﬁxed parts of ocean-shipping is a set of two or more harbours. The movable parts of ocean-shipping is a set of zero, one or more ships. Rail Transport The material of rail transport is a (possibly bridge- or tunnel-connected) land area, the EXTENT. The ﬁxed parts of rail transport is a connected rail net. The movable parts of oceanshipping is a set of zero, one or more trains.

3.15.4.3 Analyse Part-Parts Conjoins
Analysis Function Prompt 6 analyse part parts:
The domain analysis prompt
analyse part partsdirects the domain analyser to observe a “compound” of one or more materials that the conjoin embodies – together with their material sort names.
value analyse part parts(e) ≡((p,(p1,p2,...,pn)),(❝P ❞,(❝P1,...,Pn❞)))

3.16 Calculating Sort Describers
Based on the analyses of Sects. 3.8, 3.10, 3.12 and 3.13, we conclude that there are the following kinds of endurants to sort- (i.e., type) and observer function describe:
Atomic parts are what is left, when compounds, conjoins and structures have no further sub endurants. The general signature of the describer functions are of the form:
value describe ... sorts: E →RSL-Text

3.16.1 Calculating Compound Parts Sorts
Compound parts are either composite parts, with a deﬁnite number of elements, or are sets, with an indeﬁnite number of elements. Set parts are either single sort sets or are alternative sorts sets.
44 For EXTENTs see Item 70 on Page 23 of Sect. 2.4 on Page 22.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
3 DOMAINS – A Taxonomy External Qualities

3.16.1.1 Calculating Composite Parts Sorts
The above analysis amounts to the analyser ﬁrst “applying” the domain analysis prompt is composite(e) to a discrete endurant, e, where we now assume that the obtained truth value is true. Let us assume that endurants e:E consist of sub-endurants of sorts {E1,E2,...,Em}. Since we cannot automatically guarantee that our domain descriptions secure that E and each Ei (1≤i≤m) denotes disjoint sets of entities we must prove it.
Domain Description Prompt 1 calculate composite parts sorts: If is composite(e) holds, then the analyser “applies” the domain description prompt
calculate composite parts sorts(e)
resulting in the analyser writing down the endurant sorts and endurant sort observers domain description text according to the following schema:
2. calculate composite parts sorts(e) Describer
let ( 45,(❝E1,...,En ❞)) = analyse composite parts sorts(e)46 in ❝Narration:
[s] ... narrative text on sorts ... [o] ... narrative text on sort observers ... [p] ... narrative text on proof obligations ... Formalisation:
type [s] E1, ❞...❝, Em value [o] obs E1: E →E1, ❞...❝, obs Em: E →Em proof obligation [p] [Disjointness of endurant sorts] ❞ end
45 The use of the underscore, , shall inform the reader that there is not need, here, for naming a value. 46 For analyse composite parts see Sect. 3.15.2.1 on Page 63
Elaboration 2 Type, Values and Type Names: Note the use of quotes above. Please observe that when we write obs E then obs E is the name of a function. The E, when juxtaposed to obs is now a name
Analysis Function Prompt 7 type name, type of, is :
The deﬁnition of obs Ei implicitly implies the deﬁnition of
obs Ei(e)=ei ⊃type name(ei)≡❝Ei ❞∧type of(ei)≡Ei ∧is Ei(ei)
Modelling Choice 1 Composites: For compound endurants and structures the analyser cum describer chooses some to be modelled as composites.
A Road Transport Domain, I: Composite
105 There is the universe of discourse, UoD.
106 a road net, RN, and
107 a ﬂeet of vehicles, FV.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

3.16 Calculating Sort Describers
value 106 obs RN: UoD →RN 107 obs FV: UoD →FV
type 105 UoD 106 RN 107 FV
We continue the analysis & description of “our” road transport system:
108 The road net consists of a a, as we shall later see, structure, SH, of hubs and b a, as we shall also later see, structure, SL, of links.
109 The ﬂeet of vehicles consists of a a, as we shall likewise see, structure, SBC, of bus companies, and b a, as we shall later see, structure, PA, a pool of automobiles.
type 108a SH 108b SL 109a SBC 109b PA
value 108a obs SH: RN →SH 108b obs SL: RN →SL 109a obs BC: FV →BC 109b obs PA: FV →PA
47 Example 35 on the preceding page’s Narration is not representative of what it should be. Here is a more reasonable narration:
A road net is a set of hubs (road intersections) and links such that links are connected to adjacent hubs, and such that connected links and hubs form roads and where a road is a thoroughfare, route, or way on land between two places that has been paved or otherwise improved to allow travel by foot or some form of conveyance, including a motor vehicle, cart, bicycle, or horse [Wikipedia]
Et cetera for ﬂeet of vehicles. We bring this clariﬁcation here, once, and allow ourselves, with the reader’s permission, to narrate only very steno-graphically.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
3 DOMAINS – A Taxonomy External Qualities

3.16.1.2 Calculating Single Sort Part Sets
Domain Description Prompt 2 calculate single sort parts sort: If is single set sort parts(e) holds, then the analyser “applies” the domain description prompt
calculate single sort parts(e)
resulting in the analyser writing down the single set sort and sort observers domain description text according to the following schema:
3. calculate single sort parts sort(e) Describer
let ( ,❝P ❞) = analyse single sort part(e)48 in ❝Narration:
[s] ... narrative text on sort ... [o] ... narrative text on sort observer ... [p] ... narrative text on proof obligation ... Formalisation:
type [s] [s] Ps = P-set value [o] obs Ps: E →Ps ❞ end
48 For analyse single sort part see Sect. 3.15.2.2.1 on Page 63.
Elaboration 3 Type, Values and Type Names: Note the use of quotes above. Please observe that when we write obs Ps then obs Ps is the name of a function. The Ps, when juxtaposed to obs is now a name
Modelling Choice 2 Single Sort Part Sets: For compounds and structures the analyser cum describer chooses some to be modelled as sets of endurants of the same sort.

3.16.1.3 Calculating Alternative Sort Part Sets
To motivate the alternative sorts notion we ﬁrst bring this example.
Example 36 Alternative Rail Units
110 The example is that of a railway system. 111 We focus on railway nets. They can be observed from the railway system. 112 The railway net embodies a set of [railway] net units. 113 A net unit is either a straight or curved linear unit, or a simple switch, i.e., a turnout, unit50 or
a simple cross-over, i.e., a rigid crossing unit, or a single switched cross-over, i.e., a single slip unit, or a double switched cross-over, i.e., a double slip unit, or a terminal unit. 114 As a formal speciﬁcation language technicality disjointness of the respective rail unit types is afforded by RSL’s :: type deﬁnition construct.
We refer to Figure 3.4 on the facing page.
type 110. RS 111. RN
value 111. obs RN: RS →RN type
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

3.16 Calculating Sort Describers
Switchable Crossover
Track / Line / Segment / Switch Unit
Simple Crossover Unit
Switchable Crossover
/ Rigid Crossing Unit / Double Slip
Connectors − in−between are Units
Connector Connection
114. DU :: DblU 114. TU :: TerU value 112. obs NUs: RN →NUs
112. NUs = NU-set 113. NU = LU | PU | RU | SU | DU | TU 114. LU :: LinU 114. PU :: PntU 114. SU :: SwiU
We continue this example in Example 50 on Page 93
Domain Description Prompt 3 calculate alternative sort part sorts: If is alternative sort parts sorts(e) holds, then the analyser “applies” the domain description prompt
calculate alternative sort part sorts(e)
resulting in the analyser writing down the alternative sort and sort observers domain description text according to the following schema:
4. calculate alternative sort part sorts(e) Describer
let ((p1,❝E1 ❞),...,(pn,❝En ❞)) = analyse alternative sorts part set sorts(e)51 in ❝Narration:
[s] ... narrative text on alternative sorts ... [o] ... narrative text on sort observers ... [p] ... narrative text on proof obligations ... Formalisation:
type [s] Ea = E 1 | ... | E n [s] E 1 :: End 1, ..., E n :: End n value [o] obs Ea: E →Ea axiom [p] [ disjointness of alternative sorts ] E 1, ..., E n end
The set of parts, of different sorts, may have more than one element, say p, p′,..., p′′ being of the same sort E i. Since parts are not mentioned in the sort description above, cf., , only the distinct alternative sort observers appear in that description.
51 For analyse alternative sort part sorts see Sect. 3.15.2.2.2 on Page 64.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
3 DOMAINS – A Taxonomy External Qualities
Modelling Choice 3 Alternative Sort Part Sets: For compounds and structures the analyser cum describer chooses some to be modelled as sets of endurants of alternative sorts.

3.16.2 Calculating Structure Sorts
You will have observed that the compound parts and the structures endurants have in common that they both analyse into composites, respectively sets. What distinguishes them is that compound parts have internal qualities, but structures have not. Their “siblings” may, and usually will, have. Since this section, i.e., Sect. 3.16, is about sort describers only we can therefore “re-use” the sort observers of Sect. 3.16.1 – and need therefore not “repeat” them here.
Modelling Choice 4 Structures: For discrete endurants the analyser cum describer chooses some to be modelled as structures, that is, as an endurants with no substance “in-itself”, only in it “siblings”.

3.16.3 Calculating Conjoin Sorts
We remind the reader of Sect. 3.13.3 on Page 58 on conjoins.

3.16.3.1 Calculating Part-Materials Sorts
Domain Description Prompt 4 calculate part materials sorts: The domain description prompt:
calculate part materials sorts(e)
yields the conjoin sorts and conjoin sort observers domain description text according to the following schema:
5. calculate part materials sorts(e) Describer
let (( ,❝P ❞),(( ,❝M1 ❞),...,( ,❝Mm ❞))) = analyse part materials sorts(e)53 in ❝Narration:
[s] ... narrative text on conjoin sorts ... [o] ... narrative text on conjoin sort observers ... Formalisation:
type [s] [s] M1, ..., Mm value [o] obs P: E →P [o] obs M1: E →M1, ❞...❝, obs Mm: E →Mm ❞ end
53 For analyse part materials sorts see Sect. 3.15.4.1 on Page 64.
We shall mostly associate more than one material with a special kind of conjoins: the so-called treatment conjoins, leaving all other conjoins to embody just one material.
Analysis Function Prompt 8 type name, type of, is :
The deﬁnitions of obs Mi: E -¿ Mi implicitly imply the deﬁnition of
obs Mi(e) = mo ⊃type name(mi) ≡❝Mi ❞ obs Mi(e) = mi ⊃type of(mi) ≡Mi
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

3.16 Calculating Sort Describers
Modelling Choice 5 Part-Materials: For some physical parts the analyser cum describer chooses for some to be modelled as conjoins, and then in the form of a “master” part of a set of “sibling” materials.
Pipeline Parts and Material
Example 37 We refer to Appendix Sect. A.1.

3.16.3.2 Calculating Material-Parts-Parts Sorts
Domain Description Prompt 5 calculate material parts parts sorts: The domain description prompt:
calculate material parts parts sorts(e)
yields the material-parts-parts conjoin sorts and conjoin sort observers domain description text according to the following schema:
6. calculate material parts sorts(e) Describer
let ( ,(❝M,fP,mP ❞)) = analyse material parts parts material(e)55 in ❞Narration:
[s] ... narrative text on conjoin sorts ... [o] ... narrative text on conjoin sort observers ... Formalisation:
type [s] M, fP, mP value [o] obs M: E →M [o] obs fP: E →fP [o] obs mP: E →mP ❞ end
55 For analyse material parts parts sorts see Sect. 3.15.4.2 on Page 64.
Analysis Function Prompt 9 type name, type of, is :
The deﬁnitions of obs M: E →M and obs P: E →P implicitly imply the deﬁnition of
obs M(e)=m ⊃type name(m)≡❝M ❞ obs fP(e)=fp ⇒type name(fp)≡❝fP ❞ obs mP(e)=mp ⇒type name(mp)≡❝mP ❞
obs M(e)=m ⊃type of(m)≡M obs fP(e)=fp ⇒type of(fp)≡fP obs mP(e)=mp ⇒type of(mp)≡mP
Modelling Choice 6 Material-Parts-Parts: For some physical parts the analyser cum describer chooses for some to be modelled as conjoins, and then in the form of a “master” material and of a set of “sibling” materials.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
3 DOMAINS – A Taxonomy External Qualities

3.16.3.3 Calculating Part-Parts Sorts
Domain Description Prompt 6 calculate part parts sorts: The domain description prompt:
calculate part parts sorts(e)
yields the conjoin sorts and conjoin sort observers domain description text according to the following schema:
7. calculate part parts sorts(e) Describer
let ( ,(❝P ❞,(❝P1,...,Pn❞))) = analyse part parts sorts(e) in ❝Narration:
[s] ... narrative text on conjoin sorts ... [o] ... narrative text on conjoin sort observers ... [p] ... proof obligation text ... Formalisation:
type [s] P, P1, ..., Pn value [o] obs P: E →P [o] obs P1: E →P1, ..., obs Pn: E →Pn axiom [p] [ disjointness of P1, ..., Pn ] end
56 For analyse part parts sorts see Sect. 3.15.4.3 on Page 65.
Analysis Function Prompt 10 type name, type of, is :
The deﬁnitions of obs P: E →P implicitly imply the deﬁnition of
obs P(e) = p ⊃type name(p) ≡❝P ❞ obs P(e) = p ⊃type of(p) ≡P obs Pi(e) = pi ⊃type name(pi) ≡❝Pi ❞ [ i = 1,...,n ] obs Pi(e) = pi ⊃type of(pi) ≡Pi [ i = 1,...,n ]
Modelling Choice 7 Part-Parts: As for composites, structures and, now, in general for conjoins the analyser cum describer chooses for some model of a domain, one subset of the parts forming the conjoin, for another model of supposedly “the same” domain another subset.
A Road Transport Domain, III: Part-Parts
115 The structure of hubs is a set, sH, of atomic hubs, H. 116 The structure of links is a set, sL, of atomic links, L. 117 The structure of buses is a set, sBC, of composite bus companies, BC. 118 The composite bus companies, BC, are sets of buses, sB. 119 The structure of private automobiles is a set, sA, of atomic automobiles, A.
115 H, sH = H-set axiom ∀h:H • is atomic(h) 116 L, sL = L-set axiom ∀l:L • is atomic(l) 117 BC, BCs = BC-set axiom ∀bc:BC • is composite(bc) 118 B, Bs = B-set axiom ∀b:B • is atomic(b) 119 A, sA = A-set axiom ∀a:A • is atomic(a)
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

3.18 States
value 115 obs sH: SH →sH 116 obs sL: SL →sL 117 obs sBC: SBC →BCs 118 obs Bs: BCs →Bs 119 obs sA: SA →sA

3.17 On Endurant Sorts

3.17.1 Derivation Chains
Let E be a composite sort or a structure. Let E1, E2, . . . , Em be the endurants “discovered” by means of observe endurant sorts(e) where e:E. We say that E1, E2, . . . , Em are (immediately) derived from E. If Ek is derived from Ej and Ej is derived from Ei, then, by transitivity, Ek is derived from Ei.

3.17.2 No Recursive Derivations:
We “mandate” that if Ek is derived from Ej then sort name Ej is different from sort name Ek and there can be no Ek derived from Ej, that is, Ek cannot be derived from Ek. That is, we do not “provide for” recursive domain sorts. It is not a question, actually of allowing recursive domain sorts. It is, we claim to have observed, in very many analysis & description experiments, that there are no recursive domain sorts !58

3.17.3 Names of Part Sorts and Types
The domain analysis & description text prompts observe endurant sorts, as well as the belowdeﬁned observe part type, observe component sorts and observe material sorts – as well as the further below deﬁned attribute names, observe material sorts, observe unique identifier, observe mereology and observe attributes prompts introduced below – “yield” type names. That is, it is as if there is a reservoir of an indeﬁnite-sized set of such names from which these names are selected, and once obtained are never again selected. There may be domains for which two distinct part sorts may be composed from identical part sorts. In this case the domain analyser indicates so by prescribing a part sort already introduced.

3.18 States
In our continued modelling we shall make good use of a concept of states.
Deﬁnition: 58 State: By a state we shall understand any collection of one or more parts
In Chapter 4 we introduce the notion of attributes. Among attributes there are the dynamic attributes. They model that internal part quality values may change dynamically. So we may wish, on occasion, to ‘reﬁne’ our notion of state to be just those parts which have dynamic attributes. Given any universe of discourse, uod:UoD, we can recursively calculate its “full” state.
58 Some readers may object, but we insist ! If trees are brought forward as an example of a recursively deﬁnable domain, then we argue: Yes, trees can be recursively deﬁned, but it is not recursive. Trees can, as well, be deﬁned as a variant of graphs, and you wouldn’t claim, would you, that graphs are recursive ?
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
3 DOMAINS – A Taxonomy External Qualities
120 Let e be any endurant. Let arg parts be the parts to be calculated. Let res parts be the parts calculated. Initialise the calculator with arg parts={e} and res parts={}. Calculation stops with arg parts empty and res parts the result. 121 If is composite(e) then we obtain its immediate parts, analyse composite part(e); now rearrange argument and result parameters: remove e from in parts; add analyse composite part(e) to in parts; and join e to out parts. 122 If is part parts(e) then we obtain its immediate parts; then suitably rearrange argument and result parameters. 123 If is part materials(e) then we obtain its immediate parts; then suitably rearrange argument and result parameters. 124 And so forth !
value 120. calc parts: E-set →E-set →E-set 120. calc parts(arg parts)(res parts) ≡ 120. if arg parts = {} then res parts else 120. let e • e ∈arg parts in 121. is composite(e) → 121. calc parts(analyse composite part(e))(res parts ∪{e}) 122. is part parts(e) → 122. calc parts(analyse part parts(e))(res parts ∪{e}) 123. is part materials(e) → 123. calc parts(analyse part materials(e))(res parts ∪{e}) 124. et cetera ! 120. end end
Constants and States
125 Let there be given a universe of discourse, rts. It is an example of a state.
From that state we can calculate other states.
126 The set of all hubs, hs. 127 The set of all links, ls. 128 The set of all hubs and links, hls. 129 The set of all bus companies, bcs. 130 The set of all buses, bs. 131 The set of all private automobiles, as. 132 The set of all parts, ps.
value 125 rts:UoD [125] 126 hs:H-set ≡:H-set ≡obs sH(obs SH(obs RN(rts))) 127 ls:L-set ≡:L-set ≡obs sL(obs SL(obs RN(rts))) 128 hls:(H|L)-set ≡hs∪ls 129 bcs:BC-set ≡obs BCs(obs SBC(obs FV(obs RN(rts)))) 130 bs:B-set ≡∪{obs Bs(bc)|bc:BC•bc ∈bcs}
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41
3.19 A Domain Discovery Process, I
131 as:A-set ≡obs BCs(obs SBC(obs FV(obs RN(rts)))) 132 ps:(UoB|H|L|BC|B|A)-set ≡rts∪hls∪bcs∪bs∪as
Method Step 7 Domain State:
We have found, once all the state components, i.e., the endurant parts, have had their external qualities analysed, that it is then expedient to deﬁne the domain state. It can then be the basis for several concepts of internal qualities.
We refer to Sect. 6.2.1 on Page 127 for more on states.
3.19 A Domain Discovery Process, I
In this and some following sections59 we shall clarify some aspects of the domain analysis & description method. A method principle is that of exhaustively analyse & describe all external qualities of the domain under scrutiny. A method technique implied here is that sketched in Sect. 4.8 on Page 118. The method tools are here all the analysis and description prompts covered so far. In this initial chapter on domain analysis & description we have systematically covered, ﬁrst, the analysis of external qualities of domain endurants, then the description of these. We have done so in a style which analysed domains, as it were, “top-down”; from overall domain universes of discourse; through entities, endurants, discrete and continuous (material) endurants; further “across” physical parts, structures and living species; the natural and artefactual parts of the physical parts; to ﬁnally conclude our external qualities analysis with the atomic, composite and conjoin parts. With the ontology of the external qualities of domain endurants “behind us” we then concluded the main sections of this chapter with the description of external domain qualities, that is, Describer Schemas 1–5 (Pages 66–71). We can now gather all of this together with advice on a systematic process of performing the analysis & description process. Chapters 4 (Sect. 4.8 on Page 118) and 6 (Sect. 6.12 on Page 158) will likewise systematise the processes of discovering internal endurant qualities and perdurants, respectively.

3.19.1 A Domain Discovery Notice Board
Common to all the discovery processes is an idea of a notice board. A notice board, at any time in the development of a domain description, is a repository of the analysis and description process. We suggest to model the notice board in terms of three global variables. The new variable holds the parts yet to be described, The ans variable holds the sort name of parts that have so far been described, the gen variable holds the parts that have so far been described, and the txt variable holds the RSL-Text so far generated. We model the txt variable as a map from endurant identiﬁer names to RSL-Text.
A Domain Discovery Notice Board
new := {uod} , asn := { ❝UoD ❞} gen := {} , txt:RSL-Text:= [ uid UoD(uod) 7→⟨❝type UoD ❞⟩]
59 Sects. 4.8 on Page 118 and 6.12 on Page 158
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
3 DOMAINS – A Taxonomy External Qualities

3.19.2 An Endurant External Qualities Discovery Process
The discover sorts pseudo program suggests a systematic way of proceeding through analysis, manifested by the is ··· predicates, to (→) description. TSome comments are in order. The e-seta|e-setb expression yields a set of endurants that are either in e-seta, or in e-seta, or in both, but such that two endurants, ex and ey which are of the same endurants type, say E, and are in respective sets is only represented once in the result; that is, if they are type-wise the same, but value-wise different they will only be included once in the result. As this is the ﬁrst time RSL-Text is put on the notice board we express this as:
txt := txt ∪[type name(v) 7→⟨RSL-Text⟩]
Subsequent insertion of RSL-Text for internal quality descriptions and perdurants is then concatenated to the end of previously uploaded RSL-Text.
An External Qualities Domain Analysis and Description Process
discover sorts: Unit →Unit discover sorts() ≡
while new , {} do let v • v ∈new in
( new := new \ {v} ∥gen := gen ∪{v} ∥ans := ans \ {type of(v)} ) ; is atomic(v) →skip , is compound(v) →
let ((e1,...,en),(❝E1,...,En ❞))=analyse composite parts(v) in ( ans := ans ∪{❝E1,...,En❞} ∥new := new | {e1,...,en} ∥txt := txt ∪[type name(v) 7→⟨calculate composite part sorts(v)⟩] ) end, is set(v) →
( is single sort set(v) →
let ({p1,...,pn},❝P ❞)=analyse single sort parts set(v) in ( ans := ans ∪{❝P ❞} ∥new := new | {p1,...,pn} ∥
txt := txt ∪[type name(v) 7→calculate single sort part sort(v)] ) end, is alternative sorts set(v) →
let ((p1,❝E1 ❞),...,(pn,❝En ❞))= analyse alternative sorts part set(v) in ( ans := ans ∪{❝E1,...,En❞} ∥new := new | {p1,...,pn} ∥
txt := txt ∪[type name(v) 7→calculate alternative sorts part sort(v)] ) end ), is conjoin(v) →
( is part materials conjoin(v) let ((p,❝P ❞),{(m1,❝M 1 ❞),...,(mm,❝M m ❞)})=analyse part materials(v) in ( new := new | {m1,...,mn} ∥ans := ans ∪{❝P ❞} ∥
txt := txt ∪[type name(v) 7→⟨describe part materials sorts(v)⟩] ) end, is material parts parts conjoin(v) →
let((m,{fp1,...fpm},{mp1,...,mpn}),(❝M,fP,mP❞))=analyse material parts parts(v) in ( ans := ans ∪{❝M,fP,mP ❞} ∥new := new | {m,fp1,...fpm} ∥txt := txt ∪[type name(v) 7→⟨describe material parts parts sorts(v)⟩] ) end, is part parts conjoin(v) let ((p,(p1,p2,...,pn)),(❝P ❞,(❝P1,...,Pn❞)))=analyse part parts(v) in ( ans := ans ∪{❝P,P1,...,Pn❞} ∥new := new | {p,p1,...,pn} ∥txt := txt ∪[type name(v) 7→⟨describe part parts sorts(v)⟩] ) end ) end end

3.19.3 An Assumption
In the above External Qualities Domain Analysis and Description Process Schema we have conjectured that atomic parts have already had their type and observer function deﬁned.
59 For structures we remove the structure endurants, here v, from ans as it has no “root” part to be further analysed and described. This marks – a major – difference between composite endurants and structure endurants.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

3.20 Formal Concept Analysis

3.20 Formal Concept Analysis
Domain analysis involves that of concept analysis. As soon as we have identiﬁed an entity for analysis we have identiﬁed a concept. The entity is usually a spatio-temporal, i.e., a physical thing. Once we speak of it, it becomes a concept. Instead of examining just one entity the domain analyser shall examine many entities. Instead of describing one entity the domain describer shall describe a class of entities. Ganter & Wille’s [158] addresses this issue.

3.20.1 A Formalisation
This section is a transcription of Ganter & Wille’s [158] Formal Concept Analysis, Mathematical Foundations, the 1999 edition, Pages 17–18.
Some Notation: By E we shall understand the type of entities; by E we shall understand a phenomenon of type E ; by Q we shall understand the type of qualities; by Q we shall understand a quality of type Q; by E -set we shall understand the type of sets of entities; by ES we shall understand a set of entities of type E -set; by Q-set we shall understand the type of sets of qualities; and by QS we shall understand a a set of qualities of type Q-set.
Deﬁnition: 59 Formal Context: A formal context K := (ES,I,QS) consists of two sets; ES of entities and QS of qualities, and a relation I between E and Q
To express that E is in relation I to a Quality Q we write E · I · Q, which we read as “entity E has quality Example endurant entities are a speciﬁc vehicle, another speciﬁc vehicle, et cetera; a speciﬁc street segment (link), another street segment, et cetera; a speciﬁc road intersection (hub), another speciﬁc road intersection, et cetera, a monitor. Example endurant entity qualities are (a vehicle) has mobility, (a vehicle) has velocity (≥0), (a vehicle) has acceleration, et cetera; (a link) has length (>0), (a link) has location, (a link) has trafﬁc state, et cetera.
Deﬁnition: 60 Qualities Common to a Set of Entities: For any subset, sES ⊆ES, of entities we can deﬁne DQ for “derive[d] set of qualities”.
DQ : E -set →(E -set × I × Q-set) →Q-set DQ(sES)(ES,I,QS) ≡{Q | Q:Q,E:E • E∈sES ∧E·I·Q} pre: sES ⊆ES
The above expresses: “the set of qualities common to entities in sES”
Deﬁnition: 61 Entities Common to a Set of Qualities: For any subset, sQS ⊆QS, of qualities we can deﬁne DE for “derive[d] set of entities”.
DE : Q-set →(E -set × I × Q-set) →E -set DE (sQS)(ES,I,QS) ≡{E | E:E , Q:Q • Q∈sQ ∧E·I·Q }, pre: sQS ⊆QS
The above expresses: “the set of entities which have all qualities in sQS”
Deﬁnition: 62 Formal Concept: A formal concept of a context K is a pair:
(sQ,sE) where DQ(sE)(E,I,Q) = sQ and DE (sQ)(E,I,Q) = sE; sQ is called the intent of K and sE is called the extent of K
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
3 DOMAINS – A Taxonomy External Qualities

3.20.2 Types Are Formal Concepts
Now comes the “crunch”: In the TripTych domain analysis we strive to ﬁnd formal concepts and, when we think we have found one, we assign a type (or a sort) and qualities to it !

3.20.3 Practicalities
There is a little problem. To search for all those entities of a domain which each have the same sets of qualities is not feasible. So we do a combination of two things: (i) we identify a small set of entities all having the same qualities and tentatively associate them with a type, and (ii) we identify certain nouns of our national language and if such a noun does indeed designate a set of entities all having the same set of qualities then we tentatively associate the noun with a type. Having thus, tentatively, identiﬁed a type we conjecture that type and search for counterexamples, that is, entities which refute the conjecture. This “process” of conjectures and refutations is iterated until some satisfaction is arrived at that the postulated type constitutes a reasonable conjecture.

3.20.4 Formal Concepts: A Wider Implication
The formal concepts of a domain form Galois Connections [158]. We gladly admit that this fact is one of the reasons why we emphasise formal concept analysis. At the same time we must admit that this paper does not do justice to this fact. We have experimented with the analysis & description of a number of domains, and have noticed such Galois connections, but it is, for us, too early to report on this. Thus we invite the reader to study this aspect of domain analysis.

3.21 Summary
This chapter’s main title was: DOMAINS – A Taxonomy. So, the taxonomy of a domain, such as we have studied it and such as we ordain one aspect of domain analysis & description, is about manifestly visible and tangible properties, that is, the external qualities. For that study & practice we have suggested a number of analysis & description prompts.

3.21.1 The Description Schemas
We have culminated this chapter with the analysis prompts 1–6 (Pages 63–65), and the description prompts 1–6 (Pages 66–72). They all describe the, in our case RSL, domain description text to ‘produce’ when external quality analysing & describing a given endurant; but what about the description of those endurants revealed by the analysis & description of that given endurant ? The answer is simple. That is up to you ! The domain analysis & description method primarily gives you the tools. But !
A principle of the method could be to secure that all relevant, i.e., implied, endurants are analysed & described. A technique could be to, somehow, “set aside” all those endurants revealed by the analysis & description of any given endurant – with the proviso that no endurant, of type, for example, P, is analysed & described more than once.
We refer to Sect. 3.19 on Page 75 for a suggested analysis & description technique (cum pseudo program expressed in pseudo RSL).
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

3.21 Summary

3.21.2 Modelling Choices
In this chapter we have put forward some advice on description choices: We refer to Modelling Choices 1–7 (Pages 66–72). The analysis predicates and functions are merely aids. They do not effect descriptions, but descriptions are based on the result of inquiries based on deployment of these predicates and functions. Real decisions are made when effecting a description function. So the rˆole of these modelling choice paragraphs is to alert the describer to make judicious choices.
3.21.3 Method Principles, Techniques and Tools
Recall that by a method we shall understand a set of principles for selecting and applying a set of techniques using a set of tools in order to construct an artefact.

3.21.3.1 Principles of External Qualities
In this chapter we have illustrated the use of the following principles:
Divide and Conquer: We claim that the divide principle is applied in establishing the ontology: in distinguishing between describables and non-describables, in distinguishing between endurants and perdurants, and in otherwise suggesting the taxonomy as illustrated in Fig. 3.1 on Page 44. We claim that a guiding principle in this “division” has been Kai Sørlander’s Philosophy. And we claim that this “division” has helped and will help “conquer” the complexity of issues as they continue to unfold in the next chapters. Abstraction: This principle is applied in simply focusing on abstract names for endurant sorts, disregarding any further meaning of these names – meanings that will be “revealed” as we go along in analysing as describing, in the next chapters, ﬁrst unique identiﬁers, mereologies and attributes, then the elements of perdurants. Narration & Formalisation: This principle is applied in developing and presenting the domain endurant descriptions which are always, as shown in both the description schemas and in those examples which do present formalisations, in that they also show narratives.

3.21.3.2 Techniques of External Qualities
In this chapter we have illustrated the use of the following techniques:
Model-oriented Speciﬁcation: Although we say model-oriented, there really are three aspects to our formal speciﬁcations: the use of discrete mathematics60 – so far logic, sets, Cartesians; the use of RSL’s speciﬁcation/programming-like constructs: type deﬁnitions, function signatures, etc.; and the use of abstract sorts – as “inspired” from algebraic speciﬁcations. Formal Concept Analysis: This technique, whose mathematical foundation was outlined in Sect. 3.20, involves “top-down” analysis, from most abstract concepts towards less and less abstract concepts, versus “bottom-up” analysis i.e., the “other way around”. We refer to Sect. 3.14.

3.21.3.3 Tools of External Qualities
The main tools are the English language, used in narrative descriptions, the RAISE Speciﬁcation Language RSL, used in formal descriptions, and the analysis and description prompts – reviewed below – and as used by the domain analyser & describer, but a use that may not necessarily be explicitly recorded, as their “existence” are to mainly serve as aide-m´emoire. In this chapter we have introduced a number of external qualities analysis prompts. Let π designate a phenomena. The following are some of the external qualities analysis prompts.
If a phenomenon, φ, is entity(φ) then it 1 Pg. 43
60 – thus accounting for our use of the term ‘model-oriented’
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
3 DOMAINS – A Taxonomy External Qualities
is endurant(e) or 2 Pg. 47 is perdurant(e). 3 Pg. 48 If an entity, e, is endurant(e), then it is discrete(e) or 4 Pg. 48 is material(e). 5 Pg. 49 If an endurant, e, is discrete(e), then it is physical part(e) or 6 Pg. 50 is structure(e) or 7 Pg. 50 is living species(e). 8 Pg. 51 If a discrete endurant, e, is physical part(e) then it is natural part(e) or 9 Pg. 51 is artefact(e). 10 Pg. 51 We have “lumped” natural and artefactual parts into just parts. So you will not ﬁnd this characteristic reﬂected in Fig. 3.1 on Page 44. Still: If a discrete endurant, e, is physical part(e) then it is atomic(e) or 16 Pg. 56 is compound(e) or 17 Pg. 56 is conjoin(e). 22 Pg. 59 If a physical part, e, is is compound(e) then it is composite(e) or 18 Pg. 57 is set(e). 19 Pg. 57 Analysis of endurants into composites enables analyse composite parts(e) 1 Pg. 63 And this, ﬁnally, enable calculate composite parts sorts(e), respectively 1 Pg. 66 If a compound, e, is set(e) then it is single sort set(e) or 20 Pg. 58 is alternative sorts set(e). 21 Pg. 58 Analysis of endurants into sets enables analyse single sort part set(e), respectively 2 Pg. 63 analyse alternative sorts part set(e). 3 Pg. 64 And these, ﬁnally, enable calculate single sort parts sort(e), respectively 2 Pg. 68 calculate alternative sort part sorts(e) 3 Pg. 69 If a compound, e, is conjoin(e) then it is part materials conjoin(e) or 23 Pg. 59 is material parts conjoin(e) or 24 Pg. 60 is part parts conjoin(e). 25 Pg. 61 which, respectively enables analyse part materials conjoin(e) 4 Pg. 64 analyse material parts parts conjoin(e) 5 Pg. 64 analyse part parts conjoin(e) 6 Pg. 65 and these, ﬁnally enables calculate part materials sorts(e), 4 Pg. 70 calculate material parts parts sorts(e), 5 Pg. 71 calculate part parts sorts(e) or 6 Pg. 72 If a discrete endurant, e, is living species(e) then it is plant(e) or 13 Pg. 54 is animal(e). 14 Pg. 54 Some animals satisfy is human(e). 15 Pg. 54
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

3.23 Exercise Problems
3.21.4 How Much or How Little Do We Analyse and Describe ?
How many of a domain’s external qualities do we analyse and describe? There are two kinds of answers to this question. An Engineering Answer: This kind of answer may be relevant for the case of a full scale software development – where a domain engineering phase is followed by a requirements engineering phase which is then followed by a software design phase. We may then try to capture just what we think we need for that subsequent requirements capture, its analysis and prescription. Or, to “guard against unforeseen eventualities”, a little more ! Reading engineering domain analysis & description case studies helps. So do experience! A Scientiﬁc Answer: Or we try to capture “all” ! Now that is clearly not possible, at least not “in one fell swoop”61 ! So how do we go about it, as domain scientists cum engineers? We do it “domain-area-by-domain-area”. Sort of, for example like this: First what is thought of as a core domain is analysed & described. Then some additional aspects, i.e., entities, are included in a next analysis & description – leaving out, typically, some initially analysed & described entities. and so on. Just like, for example, physicists, analyse & describe natural world phenomena. We shall have more to say about what to include and what to exclude in the next chapters.

3.22 Bibliographical Notes
We refer to [70, Sect. 5.3] for a thorough, 2016–2017, ﬁve page review of types in formal speciﬁcation and programming languages.

3.23 Exercise Problems
We embark of a series of exercise problems, cf. Sects. 4.12 on Page 121, 6.14 on Page 161, 7.11 on Page 195 and 8.9 on Page 243.

3.23.1 Research Problems
Exercise 1 A Research Challenge. Reformulate Composites as Conjoins: In this chapter we have treated artefactual composites apart from conjoins. But, really, are these artefacts not also conjoins? Reformulate the appropriate text to reﬂect this “change of ontology”!
Exercise 2 A Research Challenge. Symmetry of Part-Parts Conjoins: Sets versus Composites: In this chapter we have suggested Material-Parts, Part-Materials and Part-Parts conjoins. The ‘plural’ s in material-parts means that we allow a set, more precisely, an indeﬁnite number of parts; the plural s in part-materials means that we expect either a single or a Cartesian of a deﬁnite number of materials, expressed as a Cartesian; and the ‘plural’ s in part-parts means that we allow sets of parts. [Q1] Consider a Part-Cartesian-Parts conjoin, almost like the Part-Parts conjoin but with a deﬁnite number of parts of possibly distinct sorts. How is that possibility different from the suggestion of research problem 1 above? [Q2] Could one contemplate a variant Part-Materials variant where the s indicates that we now expect an in deﬁnite number of materials ? [Q3] Discuss those possibilities, [a–b], and reformulate ontology accordingly.

3.23.2 A Student Exercise
Exercise 3 An MSc Student Exercise. Document System Parts: A document system consists of persons and documents. To anticipate exercise 29 on Page 163 we characterise, so that the reader can get at what we mean by documents, these as subject to the following operations:
61 To do something in one fell swoop is to do it suddenly or in a single, swift action.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
3 DOMAINS – A Taxonomy External Qualities
[a] creation: before there might have been a number of unrelated documents – now there is a [new] document, with some text created and written by a person; [b] editing: before there was a document – now there is a document with text and editing being done by a person; [c] reading: before there was a document – now there is “the same” document, only now it has been read by a person; [d] copying: before there was a document – now there is “the same” document, only now it has been copied by a person – and there is a copy (of the former, still existing, separate document) identifying that (former) document and with all the “contents” of the “original” of which it is a copy – the ‘copy’ creator is also identiﬁed; [e] shredding: before there was a document – now that document no longer “exists” – but otherwise all other documents remain unchanged!
[Q1] You are to narrate and formalise the parts of the document system. [Q2] Are shredded documents to be a part of the system ? This exercise is continued in Exercises 16 on Page 121, 17 on Page 121, 18 on Page 122 and 29 on Page 163.

3.23.3 Term Projects
In a textbook as this we cannot primarily rely on simple 10 line problems. It should be clear to the reader: lecturer and student, that exercise problems must be more-or-less comprehensive; they must encompass a reasonably well-delineated domain. We now list a number of such potential problem domains62:
1 the consumer, retailer, wholesaler, etc., merchandise market; 2 ﬁnancial service industry; 3 container line industry – with the (possibly overlapping) subdomain: a container terminal ports, b container stowage, and c container logistics; 4 railways systems; 5 waste disposal systems,
We suggest that the lecturer, who is using this primer for a dedicated series of lectures on domain analysis & description,
“divide” the class students into one or more groups of preferably 4–6 students each. that each group be assigned a distinct domain.
62 We refer to a number of experimental domain analysis & description reports:
2019: Container Terminal Ports, ECNU, Shanghai, China URL: imm.dtu.dk/ dibj/2018/yangshan/maersk-pa.pdf 2018: Documents, TongJi Univ., Shanghai, China URL: imm.dtu.dk/˜dibj/2017/docs/docs.pdf 2017: Urban Planning, TongJi Univ., Shanghai, China URL: imm.dtu.dk/˜dibj2017/up/urban-planning.pdf 2017: Swarms of Drones, Inst. of Softw., Chinese Acad. of Sci., Peking, China URL: imm.dtu.dk/˜dibj/2017/swarms/swarm-paper.pdf 2013: Road Transport, Techn. Univ. of Denmark URL: imm.dtu.dk/˜dibj/road-p.pdf 2012: Credit Cards, Univ. of Uppsala, Sweden URL: imm.dtu.dk/˜dibj/2016/credit/accs.pdf 2912: Weather Information, Univ. of Bergen, Norway URL: imm.dtu.dk/˜dibj/2016/wis/wis-p.pdf 2010: Web-based Transaction Processing, Techn. Univ. of Vienna, Austria URL: imm.dtu.dk/˜dibj/wfdftp.pdf 2010: The Tokyo Stock Exchange, Tokyo Univ., Japan URL: imm.dtu.dk/˜db/todai/tse-1.pdf, URL: imm.dtu.dk/˜db/todai/tse-2.pdf 2009: Pipelines, Techn. Univ. of Graz, Austria URL: imm.dtu.dk/˜dibj/pipe-p.pdf 2007: A Container Line Industry Domain, Techn. Univ. of Denmark URL: imm.dtu.dk/˜dibj/container-paper.pdf 2002: The Market, Techn. Univ. of Denmark URL: imm.dtu.dk/˜dibj/themarket.pdf 1995–2004: Railways, Techn. Univ. of Denmark - a compendium URL: imm.dtu.dk/˜dibj/train-book.pdf
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

3.23 Exercise Problems
and that, from week-to-week they discuss and write down their analysis and description (narratives and formalisations) of that domain, in phases corresponding to the ‘Exercise Problem’ Sects. 3.23.3 (the next section), and forthcoming sections: 4.12.3, 6.14.3, 7.11.2 and 8.9.2. For teachers and individual students the publisher provides access to “large scale” examples covering several of the exercise domains that we have listed.
We shall brieﬂy illustrate some external quality aspects of these domains,
in a ﬁrst week of study, completely unstructured – since , you have not yet learned the full contents of this chapter, “rambling on”; to be followed, in a second week of study, once you have learned the “stuff” of this chapter, more structured, and according to the concepts of this chapter.
Exercise 4 An MSc Student Exercise. The Consumer Market, External Qualities: You are to analyse and describe the external qualities of ‘the market’ domain of artefactual entities including consumers, retailers, wholesalers, possibly importers/exporters, and producers of merchandise aimed at ordinary consumers.
Exercise 5 An MSc Student Exercise. Financial Service Industry, External Qualities: You are to analyse and describe the external qualities of a ﬁnancial service industry domain of artefactual entities including banks, insurance companies, mortgage institutions, brokers and stock exchanges. Of what discrete endurants consists the banks, insurance companies, mortgage institutions, brokers and stock exchanges?
Exercise 6 An MSc Student Exercise. Container Line Industry, External Qualities: You are to analyse and describe the external qualities of a container line industry domain of artefactual entities including containers, container vessels, container terminal ports, trucks (transporting containers between customers and terminal ports), and the container line management. Of what discrete endurants consists these and related discrete endurants?
Exercise 7 An MSc Student Exercise. Railway Systems, External Qualities: You are to analyse and describe the external qualities of a railway domain of artefactual entities including trains and railway nets. Of what discrete endurants consists the trains, and of what discrete endurants consists the railway nets ?
Exercise 8 A PhD Student Problem. Part-Material Conjoins: Canals, External Qualities: We refer to Example 31 on Page 59. You are to analyse and describe the external qualities of a canal system of artefactual entities including locks, straight (if curved) stretches of canals, and canal forks and joins (diverting, respectively collecting) water ﬂows.
Exercise 9 A PhD Student Problem. Part-Materials Conjoins: Rum Production, External Qualities: We refer to Example 15 on Page 50. You are to analyse and describe the external qualities of a rum production system of artefactual entities including sugar cane ﬁelds, transport links from ﬁelds to sugar cane chopping facilities, such facilities, from these to the rum distillery, rum distilleries with their pot- or column stills and other production means, ware houses, an so forth.
Exercise 10 A PhD Student Problem. Part-Materials Conjoins: Waste Management, External Qualities: We refer to Example 32 on Page 60. You are to analyse and describe a waste management systems domain of artefactual entities, say focusing on just the (a) waste conveyors (whether ‘belts’ or ‘pipe’) and (b) waste processors: (a) conveyor belts or pipes, their “merging” and “diversion” (joins and forks), their initial sources and ultimate sinks, whether pumps (as for pipe) or no such things (as for mechanically moving belts that either move goods upwards, horisontally, or downwards, etc.); (b) industrial,
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
3 DOMAINS – A Taxonomy External Qualities
sewage, agricultural product, leachate63, or other, biological, etc., treatment. Note that conveyor nets are directional and have no cycles.
These exercise problems are continued in Sects. 4.12.3 on Page 122, 6.14.3 on Page 163, 7.11.2 on Page 195 and 8.9.2 on Page 243.
63 A leachate is any liquid that, in the course of passing through matter, extracts soluble or suspended solids, or any other component of the material through which it has passed.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41
DOMAINS – Towards a Statics1 Ontology Internal Qualities
In this chapter we introduce the concept of internal qualities of endurants, and cover the analysis and description of unique identiﬁers, mereologies and attributes of endurants. There is yet another, interrelating internal quality: intentionality, “something” that expresses intention, design idea, purpose of artefacts – well, some would say, also natural endurants.
External qualities of endurants of a manifest domain are, in a simplifying sense, those we can see and touch. They so to speak, take form.
Internal qualities of endurants of a manifest domain are, in a less simplifying sense, those which we may not be able to see or “feel” when touching an endurant, but they can, as we now ‘mandate’ them, be reasoned about, as for unique identiﬁers and mereologies, or be measured by some physical/chemical means, or be “spoken of” by intentional deduction, and be reasoned about, as we do when we attribute properties to endurants. As it turns out2, to analyse and describe mereology we need ﬁrst analyse and describe unique identiﬁers; and to analyse and describe attributes we need ﬁrst analyse and describe mereologies. Hence:
Method Step 8 Sequential Analysis & Description of Internal Qualities:
We advice that the domain analyser & describer ﬁrst analyse & describe unique identiﬁcation of all endurant sorts; then analyse & describe mereologies of all endurant sorts; ﬁnally analyse & describe attributes of all endurant sorts.
In this monograph we shall not suggest the modelling of unique identiﬁers and mereology of materials. We shall comment on that in appropriate sections.

4.1 Overview of this Chapter
Section 4.2 covers the crucial notion of unique identiﬁcation of endurants; Sect. 4.3 the likewise important notion of mereology – relations between parts; Sect. 4.4 covers the notion of attributes, that, which in a sense, gives “ﬂesh & blood’ to endurants; and Sect. 4.5 covers the novel notion, in computing, that of “intentional pull”. Finally Sect. 4.8 follows up on the domain discovery process of Sect. 3.19.
Other sections provide elucidation or summary observations.

4.2 Unique Identiﬁers
The concept of parts having unique identiﬁability, that is, that two parts, if they are the same, have the same unique identiﬁer, and if they are not the same, then they have distinct identiﬁers, that concept is fundamental to our being able to analyse and describe internal qualities of endurants. So we are left with the issue of “sameness” !
1 The ‘Statics’ refer back to ‘DOMAINS’ – not to ‘Ontology’ ! 2 You, the ﬁrst time reader cannot know this, i.e., the “turns out”. Once we have developed and presented the material of this chapter, then you can see it; clearly !
4 DOMAINS – Towards a Statics Ontology Internal Qualities

4.2.1 On Uniqueness of Endurants
We therefore introduce the notion of unique identiﬁcation of part endurants. We assume (i) that all part endurants, e, of any domain E, have unique identiﬁers, (ii) that unique identiﬁers (of part endurants e:E) are abstract values (of the unique identiﬁer sort UI of part endurants e:E), (iii) such that distinct part endurant sorts, Ei and Ej, have distinctly named unique identiﬁer sorts, say UIi and UIj3, and (iv) that all uii:UIi and uij:UIj are distinct.
Representation of Unique Identiﬁers: Unique identiﬁers are abstractions. When we endow two endurants (say of the same sort) distinct unique identiﬁers then we are simply saying that these two endurants are distinct. We are not assuming anything about how these identiﬁers otherwise come about.
Identiﬁability of Endurants: From a philosophical point of view, and with basis in Kai Sørlander’s Philosophy, cf. Paragraph Identity, Difference and Relations (Page 14), one can rationally argue that there are many endurants, and that they are unique, and hence uniquely identiﬁable. From an empirical point of view, and since one may eventually have a software development in mind, we may wonder how unique identiﬁablity can be accommodated. Unique identiﬁability for discrete endurants even though they may be mobile, is straightforward: one can think of of many ways of ascribing a unique identiﬁer to any part; discrete endurants do not “morph”4. Hence one can think of many such unique identiﬁcation schemas. Unique identiﬁability for materials may seem a bit more tricky. For this monograph we shall not suggest to endow materials with unique identiﬁcation. We have simply not experimented with such part-materials and material-parts domains – not enough – to suggest so.

4.2.2 Uniqueness Modelling Tools
The analysis method offers an observer function uid E which when applied to part endurants, e, yields the unique identiﬁer, ui:UI, of e.
Domain Description Prompt 7 describe unique identifier: We can therefore apply the domain description prompt:
describe unique identifier
to endurants e:E resulting in the analyser writing down the unique identiﬁer type and observer domain description text according to the following schema:
8. describe unique identifier Observer
[s] ... narrative text on unique identiﬁer sort UI ... [u] ... narrative text on unique identiﬁer observer uid E ... [a] ... axiom on uniqueness of unique identiﬁers ... Formalisation:
type [s] value [u] uid E: E →UI ❞
is part(e) is a prerequisite for describe unique identifier(e). The unique identiﬁer type name, UI above, chosen, of course, by the domain analyser cum describer, usually properly embodies the type name, E, of the endurant being analysed and mereology-described. Thus a part of type-name E might be given the mereology type name EI. Generally we shall refer to these names by UI.
3 This restriction is not necessary, but, for the time, we can assume that it is. 4 – from a state of being solid, but in various “shapes”, via states of melting, to states of vapour
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

4.2 Unique Identiﬁers
Analysis Function Prompt 11 type name, type of, is :
Given description schema 7 we have, so-to-speak, “in-reverse” that
∀e:E • uid E(e)=ui ⇒type of(ui)=UI ∧type name(ui)=❝UI ❞∧is UI(ui)
b All links have distinct identiﬁers. c All bus companies have distinct identiﬁers. d All buses of all bus companies have distinct identiﬁers. e All automobiles have distinct identiﬁers. f All parts have distinct identiﬁers.
133 We assign unique identiﬁers to all parts. 134 By a road identiﬁer we shall mean a link or a hub identiﬁer. 135 By a vehicle identiﬁer we shall mean a bus or an automobile identiﬁer. 136 Unique identiﬁers uniquely identify all parts. a All hubs have distinct [unique] identiﬁers.
type 133 H UI, L UI, BC UI, B UI, A UI 134 R UI = H UI | L UI 135 V UI = B UI | A UI value
136a uid H: H →H UI 136b uid L: H →L UI 136c uid BC: H →BC UI 136d uid B: H →B UI 136e uid A: H →A UI

4.2.3 All Unique Identiﬁers of a Domain
Given a universe of discourse we can calculate the set of the unique identiﬁers of all its parts.
value calculate all unique identiﬁers: UoD →UI-set calculate all unique identiﬁers(uod) ≡ let parts = calc parts({uod})({}) in { uid E(e) | e:E • e ∈parts } end
Road Transport: Unique Identiﬁer Auxiliary Functions
137 From the unique identiﬁer of a part we can retrieve,℘, the part having that identiﬁer.
type 137 P = H | L | BC | B | A value 137 ℘: H UI→H | L UI→L | BC UI→BC | B UI→B | A UI→A 137 ℘(ui) ≡let p:(H|L|BC|B|A)•p∈ps∧uid P(p)=ui in p end

4.2.4 Unique Identiﬁer Constants
Given a domain which do not “grow” or “shrink” in its number of observable endurants we can speak of the constancy of their sets of unique identiﬁers.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
4 DOMAINS – Towards a Statics Ontology Internal Qualities
value all uniq ids: Unit →Unit all uniq ids() ≡ let ps = calc parts(uod) in { uid E(p) | p ∈ps ∧type name(p)=❝E ❞} end
Unique Identiﬁer Constants
Example 42 We can calculate:
138 the set, huis, of unique hub identiﬁers; 139 the set, luis, of unique link identiﬁers; 140 the map, hluim, from unique hub identiﬁers to the set of unique link iidentiﬁers of the links connected to the zero, one or more identiﬁed hubs, 141 the map, lhuim, from unique link identiﬁers to the set of unique hub iidentiﬁers of the two hubs connected to the identiﬁed link; 142 the set, ruis, of all unique hub and link, i.e., road identiﬁers; 143 the set, bcuis, of unique bus company identiﬁers; 144 the set, buis, of unique bus identiﬁers; 145 the set, auis, of unique private automobile identiﬁers; 146 the set, vuis, of unique bus and automobile, i.e., vehicle identiﬁers; 147 the map, bcbuim, from unique bus company identiﬁers to the set of its unique bus identiﬁers; and 148 the (bijective) map, bbcuibm, from unique bus identiﬁers to their unique bus company identiﬁers.
value 138 huis:H UI-set ≡{uid H(h)|h:H•h ∈hs} 139 luis:L UI-set ≡{uid L(l)|l:L•l ∈ls} 142 ruis:R UI-set ≡huis∪luis 140 hluim:(H UI→ m L UI-set) ≡ 140 [h ui7→luis|h ui:H UI,luis:L UI-set•h ui∈huis∧( ,luis, )=mereo H(η(h ui))] [cf. Item 167] 141 lhuim:(L+UI→ m H UI-set) ≡ 141 [l ui7→huis | h ui:L UI,huis:H UI-set • l ui∈luis ∧( ,huis, )=mereo L(η(l ui))] [cf. Item168] 143 bcuis:BC UI-set ≡{uid BC(bc)|bc:BC•bc ∈bcs} 144 buis:B UI-set ≡∪{uid B(b)|b:B•b ∈bs} 145 auis:A UI-set ≡{uid A(a)|a:A•a ∈as} 146 vuis:V UI-set ≡buis ∪auis 147 bcbuim:(BC UI→ m B UI-set) ≡ 147 [ bc ui 7→buis | bc ui:BC UI, bc:BC • bc∈bcs ∧bc ui=uid BC(bc) ∧( , ,buis)=mereo BC(bc) ] 148 bbcuibm:(B UI→ m BC UI) ≡ 148 [ b ui 7→bc ui | b ui:B UI,bc ui:BC ui • bc ui=dombcbuim∧b ui∈bcbuim(bc ui) ]

4.2.5 A Domain Law: Uniqueness of Endurant Identiﬁers
We postulate that the unique identiﬁer observer functions are about the uniqueness of the postulated endurant identiﬁers, but how is that guaranteed? We know, as “an indisputable law of domains”, that they are distinct, but our formulas do not guarantee that ! So we must formalise their uniqueness.
All Parts of a Domain have Unique Identiﬁers
A Domain Law 1 All Parts of a Domain have Unique Identiﬁers:
149 All parts of a described domain have unique identiﬁers.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

4.3 Mereology
149 card calc parts(uod) = card calculate all unique identiﬁers(uod)
Uniqueness of Road Net Identiﬁers
Example 43 We must express the following axioms:
150 All hub identiﬁers are distinct. 151 All link identiﬁers are distinct. 152 All bus company identiﬁers are distinct.
153 All bus identiﬁers are distinct. 154 All private automobile identiﬁers are distinct. 155 All part identiﬁers are distinct.
axiom 150 card hs = card huis 151 card ls = card luis 152 card bcs = card bcuis 153 card bs = card buis 154 card as = card auis 155 card {huis∪luis∪bcuis∪buis∪auis} 155 = card huis+card luis+card bcuis+card buis+card auis
We ascribe, in principle, unique identiﬁers to all endurants whether natural or artefactual. We ﬁnd, from our many experiments, cf. the Universes of Discourse example, Page 40, that we really focus on those domain entities which are artefactual endurants and their behavioural “counterparts”.
Pipeline Unique Identiﬁers
Example 44 We refer to Appendix Sect. A.2.
Rail Net Unique Identiﬁers
156 With every rail net unit we associate a unique identiﬁer. 157 That is, no two rail net units have the same unique identiﬁer. 158 Trains have unique identiﬁers.
159 We let tris denote the set of all train identiﬁers. 160 No two distinct trains have the same unique identiﬁer. 161 Train identiﬁers are distinct from rail net unit identiﬁers.
axiom 157. ∀ui i,ui j:UI • 157. ui i = ui j ≡uid NU(ui i)=uid NU(ui j)
type 156. UI value 156. uid NU: NU →UI

4.3 Mereology
We refer to introductory section Sect. 2.8.2 on mereology as a philosophical–logic subject and Appendix Sect. B for closing material on mereology. We shall not endow materials with mereologies. We shall comment on this in Sect. 4.3.5 on Page 93.
Deﬁnition: 63 Mereology: Mereology is the study and knowledge of parts and part relations
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
4 DOMAINS – Towards a Statics Ontology Internal Qualities
Mereology, as a logical/philosophical discipline, can perhaps best be attributed to the Polish mathematician/logician Stanisław Le´sniewski [115, 61].

4.3.1 Endurant Relations
Which are the relations that can be relevant for “endurant-hood”? There are basically two relations: (i) physical ones, and (ii) conceptual ones. (i) Physically two or more endurants may be topologically either adjacent to one another, like rails of a line, or within an endurant, like links and hubs of a road net, or an atomic part is conjoined to one or more materials, or a material is conjoined to one or more parts. The latter two could also be considered conceptual “adjacencies”. (ii) Conceptually some parts, like automobiles, “belong” to an embedding endurant, like to an automobile club, or are registered in the local department of vehicles, or are ‘intended’ to drive on roads

4.3.2 Mereology Modelling Tools
When the domain analyser decides that some endurants are related in a speciﬁcally enunciated mereology, the analyser has to decide on suitable mereology types and mereology observers (i.e., endurant relations).
162 We may, to illustration, deﬁne a mereology type of an endurant e:E as a triplet type expression over set of unique [endurant] identiﬁers. 163 There is the identiﬁcation of all those endurant sorts Ei1,Ei2,...,Eim where at least one of whose properties "is of interest" to parts e:E. 164 There is the identiﬁcation of all those sorts Eio1,Eio2,...,Eion where at least one of whose properties "is of interest" to endurants e:E and vice-versa. 165 There is the identiﬁcation of all those endurant sorts Eo1,Eo2,...,Eoo for whom properties of e:E "is-
of interest" to endurants of sorts Eo1,Eo2,...,Eoo. 166 The mereology triplet sets of unique identiﬁers are disjoint and are all unique identiﬁers of the universe of discourse.
The triplet mereology is just a suggestion. As it is formulated here we mean the three ‘sets’ to be disjoint. Other forms of expressing a mereology should be considered for the particular domain and for the particular endurants of that domain. We leave out further characterisation of the seemingly vague notion "is of interest".
type 163 iEI = iEI1 | iEI2 | ... | iEIm 164 ioEI = ioEI1 | ioEI2 | ... | ioEIn 165 oEI = oEI1 | oEI2 | ... | oEIo 162 MT = iEI-set × ioEI-set × oEI-set axiom 166 ∀(iset,ioset,oset):MT • 166 card iset + card ioset + card oset = card ∪{iset,ioset,oset} 166 ∪{iset,ioset,oset} ⊆calc all unique identiﬁers(uod)
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

4.3 Mereology
Domain Description Prompt 8 describe mereology(e): If has mereology(p) holds for parts p of type P, then the analyser can apply the domain description prompt:
to parts of that type and write down the mereology types and observer domain description text according to the following schema:
9. describe mereology(e) Observer
[t] ... narrative text on mereology type ... [m] ... narrative text on mereology observer ... [a] ... narrative text on mereology type constraints ... Formalisation:
type [t] MT = M (UIi,UI j,...,UIk) value [m] mereo P: P →MT axiom [Well−formedness of Domain Mereologies] [a] A : A (MT) ❞
The mereology type name, MT, chosen of course, by the domain analyser cum describer, usually properly embodies the type name, E, of the endurant being analysed and mereology-described. The mereology type expression M (UIi,UI j,...,UIk) is a type expression over unique identiﬁers. Thus a part of type-name P might be given the mereology type name MP. A (MT) is a predicate over possibly all unique identiﬁer types of the domain description. To write down the concrete type deﬁnition for MT requires a bit of analysis and thinking
Modelling Choice 8 Mereology: As for endurant descriptions the analyser cum describer chooses for some model of a domain, one mereology, for another model of supposedly “the same” domain another mereology.
Mereology of a Road Net
167 The mereology of hubs is a pair: (i) the set of all bus and automobile identiﬁers5, and (ii) the set of unique identiﬁers of the links that it is connected to and the set of all unique identiﬁers of all vehicle (buses and private automobiles).6. 168 The mereology of links is a pair: (i) the set of all bus and automobile identiﬁers, and (ii) the set of the two distinct hubs they are connected to. 169 The mereology of of a bus company is a set the unique identiﬁers of the buses operated by that company. 170 The mereology of a bus is a pair: (i) the set of the one single unique identiﬁer of the bus company it is operating for, and (ii) the unique identiﬁers of all links and hubs7. 171 The mereology of an automobile is the set of the unique identiﬁers of all links and hubs8.
type 167 H Mer = V UI-set×L UI-set 168 L Mer = V UI-set×H UI-set 169 BC Mer = B UI-set 170 B Mer = BC UI×R UI-set 171 A Mer = R UI-set
value 167 mereo H: H →H Mer 168 mereo L: L →L Mer 169 mereo BC: BC →BC Mer 170 mereo B: B →B Mer 171 mereo A: A →A Mer

4.3.2.1 Invariance of Mereologies
For mereologies one can usually express some invariants. Such invariants express “law-like properties”, facts which are indisputable. We refer to Sect. 4.3.4 on the next page.
Invariance of Road Nets
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
4 DOMAINS – Towards a Statics Ontology Internal Qualities
Example 47 The observed mereologies must express identiﬁers of the state of such for road nets:
axiom 167 ∀(vuis,luis):H Mer • luis⊆luis ∧vuis=vuis 168 ∀(vuis,huis):L Mer • vuis=vuis ∧huis⊆huis ∧cardhuis=2 169 ∀buis:H Mer • buis = buis 170 ∀(bc ui,ruis):H Mer•bc ui∈bcuis∧ruis=ruis 171 ∀ruis:A Mer • ruis=ruis
172 For all hubs, h, and links, l, in the same road net, 173 if the hub h connects to link l then link l connects to hub h.
axiom 172 ∀h:H,l:L • h ∈hs ∧l ∈ls ⇒ 172 let ( ,luis)=mereo H(h), ( ,huis)=mereo L(l) 173 in uid L(l)∈luis ≡uid H(h)∈huis end
174 For all links, l, and hubs, ha,hb, in the same road net, 175 if the l connects to hubs ha and hb, then ha and hb both connects to link l.
axiom 174 ∀h a,h b:H,l:L • {h a,h b} ⊆hs ∧l ∈ls ⇒ 174 let ( ,luis)=mereo H(h), ( ,huis)=mereo L(l) 175 in uid L(l)∈luis ≡uid H(h)∈huis end

4.3.2.2 Deductions made from Mereologies
Once we have settled basic properties of the mereologies of a domain we can, like for unique identiﬁers, cf. Example 40 on Page 87, “play around” with that concept: ‘the mereology of a domain’.
Possible Consequences of a Road Net Mereology
176 are there [isolated] units from which one can not “reach” other units ? 177 does the net consist of two or more “disjoint” nets ? 178 et cetera.
We leave it to the reader to narrate and formalise the above properly.

4.3.3 Formulation of Mereologies
The observe mereology domain descriptor, Page 91, may give the impression that the mereo type MT can be described “at the point of issue” of the observe mereology prompt. Since the MT type expression may, in general, depend on any part sort the mereo type MT can, for some domains, “ﬁrst” be described when all part sorts have had their unique identiﬁers deﬁned.

4.3.4 Fixed and Varying Mereologies
The mereology of parts is not necessarily ﬁxed.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

4.3 Mereology
Deﬁnition: 64 Fixed Mereology: By a ﬁxed mereology we shall understand a mereology of a part which remains ﬁxed over time.
Deﬁnition: 65 Varying Mereology: By a varying mereology we shall understand a mereology of a part which may vary over time.
Fixed and Varying Mereology
Example 49 Let us consider a road net, cf. Examples 35 on Page 66, ?? on Page ??, 38 on Page 72 Example 46 on Page 91 and Example 47 on Page 91. If hubs and links never change “afﬁliation”, that is: hubs are in ﬁxed relation to zero one or more links, and links are in a ﬁxed relation to exactly two hubs then the mereology of Example 46 on Page 91 is a ﬁxed mereology. If, on the other hand hubs may be inserted into or removed from the net, and/or links may be removed from or inserted between any two existing hubs, then the mereology of Example 46 on Page 91 is a varying mereology.

4.3.5 No Materials Mereology
We comment on our decision, for this monograph, to not endow materials with mereologies. A ﬁrst reason is that we “restrict” the concept of mereology to part endurants, that is, to endurants with “more-or-less” ﬁxed extents. Materials can be said to normally not have ﬁxed extents, that is, they can “morph” from small, ﬁxed into spatially extended forms. For domains of part-materials conjoins this is particularly true. The materials in such domains ﬂow through and between parts. Some parts, at some times, embodying large, at other times small amounts of material. Some proper, but partial amount of material ﬂowing from one part to a next. Et cetera. It is for the same reason that we do not endow materials with identity. So, for this monograph we decide to not suggest the modelling of materials mereologies.

4.3.6 Some Modelling Observations
It is, in principle, possible to ﬁnd examples of mereologies of natural parts: rivers: their conﬂuence, lakes and oceans; and geography: mountain ranges, ﬂat lands, etc. But in our experimental case studies, cf. Example on Page 40, we have found no really interesting such cases. All our experimental case studies appears to focus on the mereology of artefacts. And, ﬁnally, in modelling humans, we ﬁnd that their mereology encompass all other humans and all artefacts ! Humans cannot be tamed to refrain from interacting with everyone and everything. Some domain models may emphasize physical mereologies based on spatial relations, others may emphasize conceptual mereologies based on logical “connections”.
Example 50 We refer to Example 36 on Page 68.
179 A linear rail unit is connected to exactly two distinct other rail net units of any given rail net. 180 A point unit is connected to exactly three distinct other rail net units of any given rail net. 181 A rigid crossing unit is connected to exactly four distinct other rail net units of any given rail net. 182 A single and a double slip unit is connected to exactly four distinct other rail net units of any given rail net. 183 A terminal unit is connected to exactly one distinct other rail net unit of any given rail net. 184 So we model the mereology of a railway net unit as a pair of sets of rail net unit unique identiﬁers distinct from that of the rail net unit.
value 184. mereo NU: NU →(UI-set×UI-set) axiom
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
4 DOMAINS – Towards a Statics Ontology Internal Qualities
184. ∀nu:NU • 184. let (uis i,uis o)=mereo NU(nu) in 184. case (card uis i,card usi o) = 179. (is LU(nu) →(1,1), 180. is PU(nu) →(1,2) ∨(2,1), 181. is RU(nu) →(2,2), 182. is SU(nu) →(2,2), is DU(nu) →(2,2), 183. is TU(nu) →(1,0) ∨(0,1), 184. →chaos) end 184. ∧uis i∩uis o={} 184. ∧uid NU(nu) < (uis i ∪uis o) 184. end
Linear Point Rigid Crossinng Double Slip
({ux,uy},{ua}) ({ua},{ux,uy}) ({ux},{ua}) ({ua},{ux}) ({ux,uy},{ua,ub}) ({ua,ub},{ux,uy}) ({ux,uy},{ua,ub}) ({ua,ub},{ux,uy})

4.3.7 Conjoin Mereologies
Conjoins, their “roots” and “siblings”, enjoy some special mereology relations.9
Let us ﬁrst consider the pragmatics of conjoins, e. Part-materials conjoins, e, are “carriers” or “holders” of materials. The carrier is p, that is, analyse conjoin part(e). The carried or held materials are (m1,m2,...,mm), that is, analyse conjoin materials(e). Usually we shall only associate more than one material with the so-called treatment conjoin. See below. The carrier or holder, p, somehow provides a “container” for each mi. We shall, without loss of generality, restrict supply, pipe, valve, pump and dispose conjoins, see below, to embody just one material. Conjoins either serve to transport or to process10 materials. Transport is achieved by moving material between topologically connected conjoins. Processing is achieved by treating one or more materials, of the same conjoin, to interact by being operated upon. Conjoins that participate in the transport and treatment of materials, we conclude, typically form directed, acyclic nets. We shall refer to such nets as ‘conjoin nets’. Further pragmatics are those of the interconnection of conjoins as expressed in their mereologies. First, to transport, they must form, usually directed, acyclic, nets. These nets are sequences of conjoins acting as pipes, “interspersed” by conjoins serving to fork (divert), from one, a fork conjoin, ﬂow, into two, usually pipe, conjoins, or to join (merge) transport from two (or more) , usually pipe ﬂow, into one, the join ﬂow, or to treat, within a single conjoin, the ‘treatment’ conjoin, one or more materials into one or more new and/or replacement materials. By a ﬂow net we shall understand a collection of conjoins formed as an acyclic, directed graph. Figure 4.2 on the next page abstracts a possible conjoin ﬂow net. .
9 We remind the reader of the ‘pragmatics’ paragraph of Sect. 3.13.3 on Page 58. 10 – the supply, pipe, valve, pump and dispose conjoins transport are restricted to carry just one material; the treatment conjoin usually process, hence contain, more than one material.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

4.4 Attributes
Supply (Well), Dispose (Sink)
The abstracted ﬂow net shown in Fig. 4.2 on the facing page is at the basis in domain models for waste management, industrial production supply, production and demand, (water oil gas, etc.) pipe lines, et cetera. For directed, acyclic nets of material transport and treatment of units of connected conjoins we can conclude that there must be units which supply [inputs] materials to the net; units which open or close, by means of pumps [empowers] or valves [on/off], the ﬂow of materials; units which simply pipes [ﬂows] materials “along”; units which fork [ﬂow] materials in two [or more]11 ongoing directions; units which join two [or more]12 material ﬂows into one ﬂow; units which treat [process] one or more incoming [inﬂowed] and contained materials13 into one or more contained and outgoing [out-ﬂowed] materials14; and units which dispose [outputs] one [or more]15 materials16. Let us then consider the technicalities of modelling conjoins e. The conjoin has a part: observe conjoin part(e), p, and it has one or more materials: observe conjoin materials(e), (m1,m2,...,mm). The mereology of p includes that of the unique identiﬁer of e. When we, above, cautiously, write ‘includes’ it is to say that there may be other topological or conceptual (including intentional) relations. We can likewise consider material-parts conjoins but leave this to the reader. This section is “conjoined” with Sect. 4.4.8 on Page 110.
Example 51 We refer to Appendix Sect. A.3.

4.4 Attributes
To recall: there are three sets of internal qualities: unique identiﬁers, part mereology and attributes. Unique identiﬁers and mereology are rather deﬁnite kinds of internal endurant qualities; attributes form more “free-wheeling” sets of internal qualities. Whereas, for this monograph, we suggest to not endow
11 In this monograph we shall just treat the case of two fork outlets. 12 See footnote 11. 13 mi1,mi2,...,mis 14 mo1,mo2,...,mod 15 See footnote 11. 16 We shall not “speculate” on the possible, general relationships between mi1,mi2,...,mis and mo1,mo2,...,mod.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
4 DOMAINS – Towards a Statics Ontology Internal Qualities
materials with unique identiﬁcation and mereologies all endurants, i.e., including materials, are endowed with attributes.

4.4.1 Inseparability of Attributes from Parts and Materials
Parts and materials are typically recognised because of their spatial form and are otherwise characterised by their intangible, but measurable attributes. That is, whereas endurants, whether discrete (as are parts) or continuous (as are materials), are physical, tangible, in the sense of being spatial [or being abstractions, i.e., concepts, of spatial endurants], attributes are intangible: cannot normally be touched17, or seen18, but can be objectively measured19. Thus, in our quest for describing domains where humans play an active rˆole, we rule out subjective “attributes”: feelings, sentiments, moods. Thus we shall abstain, in our domain science also from matters of aesthetics. We equate all endurants — which have the same type of unique identiﬁers the same type of mereologies, and the same types of attributes — with one sort. Thus removing an internal quality from an endurant makes no sense: the endurant of that type either becomes an endurant of another type or ceases to exist (i.e., becomes a non-entity)! We can roughly distinguish between two kinds of attributes: those which can be motivated by physical (incl. chemical) concerns, and those, which, although they embody some form of ‘physics measures’, appear to reﬂect on event histories: “if ‘something’, φ, has ‘happened’ to an endurant, ea, then some ‘commensurate thing’, ψ, has ‘happened’ to another (one or more) endurants, eb.” where the ‘something’ and ‘commensurate thing’ usually involve some ‘interaction’ between the two (or more) endurants. It can take some reﬂection and analysis to properly identify endurants ea and eb and commensurate events φ and ψ. Example 65 on Page 113 shall illustrate the, as we shall call it, intentional pull of event histories.

4.4.2 Attribute Modelling Tools

4.4.2.1 Attribute Quality and Attribute Value
We distinguish between an attribute (as a logical proposition, of a name, i.e.) type, and an attribute value, as a value in some value space.
Analysis Function Prompt 12 analyse attribute types:
One can calculate the set of attribute type names of parts and materials with the following domain analysis prompt:
analyse attribute type names
Thus for a part p we may have analyse attribute type names(p) = {❝A1 ❞,❝A2 ❞,...,❝Am ❞}.

4.4.2.2 Attribute Types and Functions
Let us recall that attributes cover qualities other than unique identiﬁers and mereology. Let us then consider that parts and materials have one or more attributes. These attributes are qualities which help characterise “what it means” to be a part or a material. Note that we expect every part and material to have at least one attribute. The question is now, in general, how many and, particularly, which.
17 One can see the red colour of a wall, but one touches the wall. 18 One cannot see electric current, and one may touch an electric wire, but only if it conducts high voltage can one know that it is indeed an electric wire. 19 That is, we restrict our domain analysis with respect to attributes to such quantities which are observable, say by mechanical, electrical or chemical instruments. Once objective measurements can be made of human feelings, beauty, and other, we may wish to include these “attributes” in our domain descriptions.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

4.4 Attributes
Domain Description Prompt 9 describe attributes: The domain analyser experiments, thinks and reﬂects about endurant, e, attributes. That process is initiated by the domain description prompt:
describe attributes(e).
The result of that domain description prompt is that the domain analyser cum describer writes down the attribute (sorts or) types and observers domain description text according to the following schema: for any endurant e.
10. describe attributes Observer
let {❝A1, ..., Am ❞} = analyse attribute type names(e) in ❝Narration:
[t] ... narrative text on attribute sorts ... [o] ... narrative text on attribute sort observers ... [p] ... narrative text on attribute sort proof obligations ... Formalisation:
type [t] A1, ..., Am, value [o] attr A1: E→A1, ..., attr Am: E→Am proof obligation [Disjointness of Attribute Types] [p] PO: let P be any part sort in [the domain description] [p] let a:(A1|A2|...|Am) in is Ai(a) , is A j(a) [i,i, i,j:[1..m]] end end ❞ end
The is A j(e) is deﬁned by Ai, i:[1..n].
Modelling Choice 9 Endurant Attributes: As for endurant and mereology descriptions the analyser cum describer chooses for some model of a domain, one set of attributes, for another model of supposedly “the same” domain another set of attributes .
Let A1, ..., An be the set of all conceivable attributes of endurants e:E. (Usually n is a rather large natural number, say in the order of a hundred conceivable such.) In any one domain model the domain analyser cum describer selects a modest subset, A1, ..., Am, i.e., m < n. Across many domain models for “moreor-less the same” domain m varies and the attributes, A1, ..., Am, selected for one model may differ from those, A′ 1, ..., A′ m′, chosen for another model. The type deﬁnitions: A1, ..., Am, inform us that the domain analyser has decided to focus on the distinctly named A1, ..., Am attributes.20 The value clauses attr A1:P→A1, ..., attr An:P→An are then “automatically” given: if an endurant, e:E, has an attribute Ai then there is postulated, “by deﬁnition” [eureka] an attribute observer function attr Ai:E→Ai et cetera
We cannot automatically, that is, syntactically, guarantee that our domain descriptions secure that the various attribute types for a endurant sort denote disjoint sets of values. Therefore we must prove it.

4.4.2.3 Attribute Categories
Michael A. Jackson [252] has suggested a hierarchy of attribute categories: from static to dynamic values – and within the dynamic value category: inert values, reactive values, active values – and within the dynamic active value category: autonomous values, biddable values and programmable values. We now review these attribute value types. The review is based on [252, M.A.Jackson]. Endurant attributes are either constant or varying, i.e., static or dynamic attributes.
Attribute Category: 1 By a static attribute, a:A, is static attribute(a), we shall understand an attribute whose values are constants, i.e., cannot change.
20 The attribute type names are chosen by the domain analyser to reﬂect on domain phenomena.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
4 DOMAINS – Towards a Statics Ontology Internal Qualities
Example 52 Let us exemplify road net attributes in this and the next examples. And let us assume the following attributes: year of ﬁrst link construction and link length at that time. We may consider both to be static attributes: The year ﬁrst established, seems an obvious static attribute and the length is ﬁxed at the time the road was ﬁrst built.
Attribute Category: 2 By a dynamic attribute, a:A, is dynamic attribute(a), we shall understand an attribute whose values are variable, i.e., can change. Dynamic attributes are either inert, reactive or active attributes.
Attribute Category: 3 By an inert attribute, a:A, is inert attribute(a), we shall understand a dynamic attribute whose values only change as the result of external stimuli where these stimuli prescribe new values.
Example 53 And let us now further assume the following link attribute: link name. We may consider it to be an inert attribute: the name is not “assigned” to the link by the link itself, but probably by some road net authority which we are not modelling.
Attribute Category: 4 By a reactive attribute, a:A, is reactive attribute(a), we shall understand a dynamic attribute whose values, if they vary, change in response to external stimuli, where these stimuli either come from outside the domain of interest or from other endurants.
Example 54 Let us further assume the following two link attributes: “wear and tear”, respectively “icy and slippery”. We will consider those attributes to be reactive in that automobiles (another part) travelling the link, an external “force”, typically causes the “wear and tear”, respectively the weather (outside our domain) causes the “icy and slippery” property.
Attribute Category: 5 By an active attribute, a:A, is active attribute(a), we shall understand a dynamic attribute whose values change (also) of its own volition. Active attributes are either autonomous, biddable or programmable attributes.
Attribute Category: 6 By an autonomous attribute, a:A, is autonomous attribute(a), we shall understand a dynamic active attribute whose values change only “on their own volition”. The values of an autonomous attributes are a “law onto themselves and their surroundings”.
Autonomous Attributes
Example 55 We enlarge scope of our examples of attribute categories to now also include automobiles (on the road net). In this example we assume that an automobile is driven by a human [behaviour]. These are some automobile attributes: velocity, acceleration, and moving straight, or turning left, or turning right. We shall consider these three attributes to be autonomous. It is the driver, not the automobile, who decides whether the automobile should drive at constant velocity, including 0, or accelerate or decelerate, including stopping. And it is the driver who decides when to turn left or right, or not turn at all.
Attribute Category: 7 By a biddable attribute, a:A, is biddable attribute(a) we shall understand a dynamic active attribute whose values are prescribed but may fail to be observed as such.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

4.4 Attributes
Attribute Category: 8 By a programmable attribute, a:A, is programmable attribute(a), we shall understand a dynamic active attribute whose values can be prescribed.
Programmable Attribute
Example 56 We continue with the automobile on the road net examples. In this example we assume that an automobile includes, as one inseparable entity, “the driver”. These are some automobile attributes: position on a link, velocity, acceleration (incl. deceleration), and direction: straight, turning left, turning right. We shall now consider these three attributes to be programmable.
autonomous programmable
monitorable attributes
Attribute Category: 9 By a monitorable only attribute, a:A, is monitorable only attribute(a), we shall understand a dynamic active attribute which is either inert or reactive or autonomous.
That is: is monitorable(e)≡is inert(e)∨is reactive(e)∨is autonomous(e).
Example 57 We treat some attributes of the hubs of a road net.
185 There is a hub state. It is a set of pairs, (lf ,lt), of link identiﬁers, where these link identiﬁers are in the mereology of the hub. The meaning of the hub state in which, e.g., (lf ,lt) is an element, is that the hub is open, “green”, for trafﬁc from link lf to link lt. If a hub state is empty then the hub is closed, i.e., “red” for trafﬁc from any connected links to any other connected links. 186 There is a hub state space. It is a set of hub states. The current hub state must be in its state space. The meaning of the hub state space is that its states are all those the hub can attain.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
100 4 DOMAINS – Towards a Statics Ontology Internal Qualities
187 Since we can think rationally about it, it can be described, hence we can model, as an attribute of hubs, a history of its trafﬁc: the recording, per unique bus and automobile identiﬁer, of the time ordered presence in the hub of these vehicles. Hub history is an event history.
type 185 HΣ = (L UI×L UI)-set axiom 185 ∀h:H • obs HΣ(h) ∈obs HΩ(h) type 186 HΩ= HΣ-set 187 H Trafﬁc 187 H Trafﬁc = (A UI|B UI) → m (TIME × VPos)∗
187 ∀ht:H Trafﬁc,ui:(A UI|B UI) • 187 ui ∈dom ht ⇒time ordered(ht(ui)) value 185 attr HΣ: H →HΣ 186 attr HΩ: H →HΩ 187 attr H Trafﬁc: H →H Trafﬁc value 187 time ordered: (TIME × VPos)∗→Bool 187 time ordered(tvpl) ≡...
Invariance of Road Net Trafﬁc States
Example 58 We continue Example 57 on the previous page.
188 The link identiﬁers of hub states must be in the set, luis, of the road net’s link identiﬁers.
axiom 188 ∀h:H • h ∈hs ⇒ 188 let hσ = attr HΣ(h) in ∀(luii,liuii′):(L UI×L UI) • (luii,luii′) ∈hσ ⇒{luii,l′ uii} ⊆luis end
Example 59 We refer to Appendix Sect. A.4.
You may skip Example 60 in a ﬁrst reading.
Road Transport: Further Attributes
189 There is a link state. It is a set of pairs, (hf ,ht), of distinct hub identiﬁers, where these hub identiﬁers are in the mereology of the link. The meaning of a link state in which (hf ,ht) is an element is that the link is open, “green”, for trafﬁc from hub hf to hub ht. Link states can have either 0, 1 or 2 elements. 190 There is a link state space. It is a set of link states. The meaning of the link state space is that its states are all those the which the link can attain. The current link state must be in its state space. If a link state space is empty then the link is (permanently) closed. If it has one element then it is a one-way link. If a one-way link, l, is imminent on a hub whose mereology designates that link, then the link is a “trap”, i.e., a “blind cul-de-sac”. 191 Since we can think rationally about it, it can be described, hence it can model, as an attribute of links a history of its trafﬁc: the recording, per unique bus and automobile identiﬁer, of the time ordered positions along the link (from one hub to the next) of these vehicles. 192 The hub identiﬁers of link states must be in the set, huis, of the road net’s hub identiﬁers.
type 189 LΣ = H UI-set [programmable, Df.8 Pg.99] axiom 189 ∀lσ:LΣ •card lσ=2 189 ∀l:L • obs LΣ(l) ∈obs LΩ(l) type
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

4.4 Attributes 101
190 LΩ= LΣ-set [static, Df.1 Pg.97] 191 L Trafﬁc [programmable, Df.8 Pg.99] 191 L Trafﬁc = (A UI|B UI) → m (T×(H UI×Frac×H UI))∗
191 Frac = Real, axiom frac:Fract • 0<frac<1 value 189 attr LΣ: L →LΣ 190 attr LΩ: L →LΩ 191 attr L Trafﬁc: : →L Trafﬁc axiom 191 ∀lt:L Trafﬁc,ui:(A UI|B UI)•ui ∈dom ht ⇒time ordered(ht(ui)) 192 ∀l:L • l ∈ls ⇒ 192 let lσ = attr LΣ(l) in ∀(huii,huii′):(H UI×K UI) • 192 (huii,huii′) ∈lσ ⇒{huii,h′ uii} ⊆huis end
193 Bus companies create, maintain, revise and distribute [to the public (not modeled here), and to buses] bus time tables, not further deﬁned.
type 193 BusTimTbl [programmable, Df.8 Pg.99] value 193 attr BusTimTbl: BC →BusTimTbl
There are two notions of time at play here: the indeﬁnite “real” or “actual” time; and the deﬁnite calendar, hour, minute and second time designation occurring in some textual form in, e.g., time tables.
194 Buses run routes, according to their line number, ln:LN, in the 195 bus time table, btt:BusTimTbl obtained from their bus company, and and keep, as inert attributes, their segment of that time table. 196 Buses occupy positions on the road net:
a either at a hub identiﬁed by some h ui, b or on a link, some fraction, f:Fract, down an identiﬁed link, l ui, from one of its identiﬁed connecting hubs, fh ui, in the direction of the other identiﬁed hub, th ui. 197 Et cetera.
type 194 [programmable, Df.8 Pg.99] 195 BusTimTbl [inert, Df.3 Pg.98] 196 BPos == atHub | onLink [programmable, Df.8 Pg.99] 196a atHub :: h ui:H UI 196b onLink :: fh ui:H UI×l ui:L UI×frac:Fract×th ui:H UI 196b Fract = Real, axiom frac:Fract • 0<frac<1 197 ... value 195 attr BusTimTbl: B →BusTimTbl 196 attr BPos: B →BPos
We illustrate but a few attributes:
198 Automobiles have static number plate registration numbers. 199 Automobiles have dynamic positions on the road net:
[196a] either at a hub identiﬁed by some h ui, [196b] or on a link, some fraction, frac:Fract down an identiﬁed link, l ui, from one of its identiﬁed connecting hubs, fh ui, in the direction of the other identiﬁed hub, th ui.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
102 4 DOMAINS – Towards a Statics Ontology Internal Qualities
type 198 RegNo [static, Df.1 Pg.97] 199 APos == atHub | onLink [programmable, Df.8 Pg.99] 196a atHub :: h ui:H UI 196b onLink :: fh ui:H UI × l ui:L UI × frac:Fract × th ui:H UI 196b Fract = Real, axiom frac:Fract • 0<frac<1 value 198 attr RegNo: A →RegNo 199 attr APos: A →APos
Obvious attributes that are not illustrated are those of velocity and acceleration, forward or backward movement, turning right, left or going straight, etc. The acceleration, deceleration, even velocity, or turning right, turning left, moving straight, or forward or backward are seen as command actions. As such they denote actions by the automobile — such as pressing the accelerator, or lifting accelerator pressure or braking, or turning the wheel in one direction or another, etc. As actions they have a kind of counterpart in the velocity, the acceleration, etc. attributes. Observe that bus companies each have their own distinct bus time table, and that these are modeled as programmable, Item 193 on the previous page, Page 101. Observe then that buses each have their own distinct bus time table, and that these are model-led as inert, Item 195 on the preceding page, Page 101. In Items 288–289b Pg. 151 we shall see how the buses communicate with their respective bus companies in order for the buses to obtain the programmed bus time tables “in lieu” of their inert one ! In Items 187 Pg. 99 and 191 Pg. 100, we illustrated an aspect of domain analysis & description that may seem, and at least some decades ago would have seemed, strange: namely that if we can think, hence speak, about it, then we can model it “as a fact” in the domain. The case in point is that we include among hub and link attributes their histories of the timed whereabouts of buses and automobiles.21
Calculating Attributes
200 Given endurant e we can meta-linguistically22 calculate names for its static attributes. 201 Given endurant e we can meta-linguistically calculate name for its monitorable-only attributes attributes. 202 Given endurant e we can meta-linguistically calculate names for its controllable attributes. 203 These four sets make up all the attributes of endurant e.
The type names ST, MA, PT designate mutually disjoint sets, ST, of names of static attributes, sets, MA, of names of monitoriable, i.e., monitorable-only and biddable, attributes, sets, PT, of names of programmable, i.e., fully controllable attributes.
value 200 stat attr types: E →ST 201 moni attr types: E →MA 202 prgr attr types: E →PT
axiom 203 ∀e:E • 200 let stat nms = stat attr types(e), 201 moni nms = moni attr types(e), 202 prgr nms = prgr types(e) in 203 card stat nms + card moni nms + card prgr nms 203 = card(stat nms ∪mon nms ∪prgr nms) end
The above formulas are indicative, like mathematical formulas, they are not computable.
204 Given endurant e we can meta-linguistically calculate its static attribute values, stat attr vals;
22 By using the term meta-linguistically here we shall indicate that we go outside what is computable – and thus appeal to the reader’s forbearance.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

4.4 Attributes 103
205 given endurant e we can meta-linguistically calculate its monitorable-only attribute values, moni attr vals; and 206 given endurant e we can meta-linguistically calculate its programmableattribute values, prgr attr vals.
The type names sa1, ..., pap refer to the types denoted by the corresponding types name nsa1, ..., npap.
value 204 stat attr vals: E →SA1×SA2×...×SAs 204 stat attr vals(e) ≡ 204 let {nsa1,nsa2,...,nsas} = stat attr types(e) in 204 (attr sa1(e),attr sa2(e),...,attr sas(e)) end
205 moni attr vals: E →MA1×MA2×...×MAm 205 moni attr vals(e) ≡ 205 let {nma1,nma2,...,nmam} = moni attr types(e) in 205 (attr ma1(e),attr ma2(e),...,attr mam(e)) end
206 prgr attr vals: E →PA1×PA2×...×PAp 206 prgr attr vals(e) ≡ 206 let {npa1,npa2,...,npap} = prgr attr types(e) in 206 (attr pa1(e),attr pa2(e),...,attr pap(e)) end
The “ordering” of type values, (attr sa1(e),...,attr sas(e)), (attr ma1(e),...,attr mam(e)), et cetera, is arbitrary.

4.4.3 A Discourse on Attribute Kinds
In this, in a sense, discursive, section we shall depart, somewhat, from a more direct presentation of analysis and description prompts. We shall muse, as it were, about the following, perceived kinds of concepts and attributes:
space, time and substance, spatio and temporal attributes, natural and artefactual attributes,
geometric attributes, action and event attributes, and others !

4.4.3.1 A Discussion
Space, Time and Matter23: Space, SPACE, time, TIME, and substance, MATTER, cannot be sˆole attributes of endurants24. Endurants exist in space and time. Manifest endurants have substance, i.e., consists of MATTER. These three kinds of properties follow by transcendental deduction from rational reasoning. So it is futile to ascribe attributes sˆolely of these kinds to endurants! But, stop here, pause a bit. Somehow we must ascribe what appears to be space, time and substance properties to endurants: length, speed, weight. So what is the problem? The problem is that these latter kinds of properties are artefactual properties. Mankind have found a need to somehow measure spatial, temporal and substance phenomena.
Spatio-like Attributes: The geographical location of a speciﬁc “point”25 on the surface of earth, represented by its longitude26 and latitude27, can be an attribute of an endurant. This is so because the representation are artefactual qualities, not transcendentally deducible facts. POINT are mathematical concepts, created as mathematical abstractions – as are LINEs, CURVEs, SURFACEs and EXTENTs.
23 We remind the reader of Chapter 2. 24 But spatial measures, time stamps, time intervals, and substance (matters) may be attributes 25 By “a speciﬁc ‘point’ ” we do not mean a POINT. 26 Longitude is the angle east or west of a reference meridian to another meridian that passes through that point [Wikipedia]. 27 Latitude is the angle between the equatorial plane and the straight line that passes through that point and through (or close to) the center of the earth [Wikipedia]
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
104 4 DOMAINS – Towards a Statics Ontology Internal Qualities
The respective Lengths, Areas and Volumes of spatial entities are artefactual qualities ascribed by humans and measured in, for example, m, m2 and m3, respectively.
Temporal-like Attributes: Other attributes are endowed, as properties of endurants, not by man, but inherently there, given to us. The Time at which some action is invoked or some event occurs, is not a TIME; and the TimeInterval (time interval or duration) between two actions or events is not a TI. Instead humans, after many attempts, have devised ways and means of representing, respectively measuring Times and TimeIntervals28. A DAY is not 24 hours, 0 minute, 0 seconds, and 0 which or whatever fraction of a second you may think of. A SIDERIALYEAR is the TI it takes for the earth to orbit the sun. While doing so, the earth spins on its axis. One complete spin takes exactly a DAY. But our concept of a Day is that of 24 Hours, with each hour “divided” into 60 Minutes, and each minute into 60 Seconds, and so forth. So Year, Month, Week, Day, Hour, Minute, Second, etc., are human constructions devised to represent time intervals. These time interval representations are of some absolute kind. They are independent of which endurant, at which POINT in SPACE, e.g., where on earth, they may be related to. As human constructions they have lead to many ingenious means for their measure: clocks of many kinds29,30. But clocks do not measure time, only time intervals. The time that an event occurred, or is to occur, or an action was (to be) invoked, are of absolute kind. A time, like “Saturday 16 May, 2020, at 9:27:03” is such an example. Time has, to some physicists, no [absolute] beginning point. There is no “On the ﬁrst day and in the ﬁrst hour of creation”. So mankind has settled on some, you may say, ‘compromise’. We “speak of” time, usually, as if it was an interval: “Around the year 482 Before Christ 31”, or “August 16, 2020: 11:41 am, after Christ 32”. Time indications must state the, or an approximate location on earth, for which they are given, or some other reference frame, e.g., a time zone, such as Greenwich Mean Time, GMT or other (CET, EET, WET, ET, PST etc.). For early continental continental explorers and ocean sea-farers, accurate chronometers became indispensable33.
Spatio-Temporal-like Attributes: We talk, for example, of speed as distance, i.e., length, covered by time interval. And we talk, for example, of velocity, i.e., speed with vectorial direction. On one hand they are spatio-temporal phenomena, inherent as transcendentally deducible facts. On the other hand we also experience them, and may have need to represent them as attributes. In other words, we must be careful in our analysis.
Action and Event Attributes34: An important class of attributes record actions and events that occur to endurants. That an action or event occurs or has occurred is immaterial, but we can talk about it ! As such it may need being recorded in an appropriate attribute. Such recording are, to be meaningful, time-stamped.
Action and Event Attributes
Example 61 From our continuing road transport example we give an example. The occurrence of an automobile at a hub or on a link is an event and can, as such, be recorded in both hub, link and automobile “history” attributes. From our likewise continuing pipeline example we give examples. The actions of
28 To wit: quartz-crystal clocks of the 1930s. 29 A second is deﬁned as 9,192,631,770 oscillations of the caesium atom, off by only one second after running for 300 million years. 30 Some references [www.encyclopedia.com]:
Gibbs, Sharon L. Greek and Roman Sundials. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1976. Landes, David S. Revolution in Time: Clocks and the Making of the Modern World. Cambridge, MT: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1983. Tannenbaum, Beulah, and Myra Stillman. Understanding Time: The Science of Clocks and Calendars. New York: Whittlesey House, McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc.,1958.
31 – time of the birth of the Greek philosopher Plato 32 – time at last editing this text 33 Christiaan Huygens, following his invention of the pendulum clock in 1656, made the ﬁrst attempt at a marine chronometer in 1673 34 We refer to Defns. 70 on Page 129 and 71 on Page 129 for deﬁnitions of the concepts of action and event.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

4.4 Attributes 105
opening and closing of valves, the actions of starting and ending of pumping, and the events of a pipe unit becoming empty, or overﬂowing (“choked”), or changing from laminar to turbulent ﬂow35, can, as such, be recorded in both pipeline unit “history” attributes.
Natural and Artefactual Attributes: From the above we can see that in seeking properties of endurants we waver between natural phenomena and artefactual “measures”. So we need be clear of the distinction, for an endurant, whether what may seem to be [a kind of] an endurant attribute is really a SPACE,TIME or SUBSTANCE phenomenon; or whether it is one for which we have “invented” measures. The former we refer to as natural attributes. They can be expressed using the physical attribute kinds detailed in Sect. 4.4.4 next The latter we refer to as artefactual attributes. They can be expressed using both physical attribute kinds and domain concepts such as, for example,unique identiﬁers.
Geometrical Attributes: Manifest endurants reside in space. But we characterise them by such geometric measures as position in some earthly, or relative coordinate system, length, a relative measure, and volume. For intricate geometric objects we may be comprehension-wise better off by presenting them in diagrams, drawings or annotated photos or videos.

4.4.3.2 A Preliminary Conclusion
We could go on ﬁnding further varieties of attributes. But we stop here! So why this section ? So that you may hopefully be very careful in your assignment of attributes.

4.4.4 Physics Attributes
In this section we shall muse about the kind of attributes that are typical of natural parts, but which may also be relevant as attributes of artefacts. Typically, when physicists write computer programs, intended for calculating physics behaviours, they “lump” all of these into the type Real, thereby hiding some important physics ’dimensions’. In this section we shall review that which is missing ! The subject of physical dimensions in programming languages is rather decisively treated in David Kennedy’s 1996 PhD Thesis [259] — so there really is no point in trying to cast new light on this subject other than to remind the reader of what these physical dimensions are all about.

4.4.4.1 SI: The International System of Quantities
In physics we operate on values of attributes of manifest, i.e., physical phenomena. The type of some of these attributes are recorded in well known tables, cf. Tables 4.1–4.3. Table 4.1 shows the base units of physics.
Base quantity Name Type length meter mass kilogram kg time second electric current ampere thermodynamic temperature kelvin amount of substance mole mol luminous intensity candela
35 Becoming empty, overﬂowing or transiting between laminar and turbulent ﬂows are fuzzy measures; see Sect. 4.4.9 on Page 111.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
106 4 DOMAINS – Towards a Statics Ontology Internal Qualities
Name Type Derived Quantity Derived Type radian rad angle m/m steradian solid angle m2×m−2
newton force, weight kg×m×s−2
pascal pressure, stress N/m2
joule energy, work, heat N×m watt power, radiant ﬂux J/s coulomb electric charge s×A volt electromotive force W/A (kg×m2×s−3×A−1) farad capacitance C/V (kg−1×m−2×s4×A2) ohm electrical resistance V/A (kg×m2×s3×A2) siemens electrical conductance A/V (kg1×m2×s3×A2) weber magnetic ﬂux V×s (kg×m2×s−2×A−1) tesla magnetic ﬂux density Wb/m2 (kg×s2×A−1) henry inductance Wb/A (kg×m2×s−2×A2) degree Celsius oC temp. rel. to 273.15 K K lumen luminous ﬂux cd×sr (cd) lux illuminance lm/m2 (m2×cd)
Name Explanation Derived Type area square meter
speed meter per second m/s wave number reciprocal meter m-1 mass density kilogram per cubic meter kg/m3
speciﬁc volume cubic meter per kilogram m3/kg current density ampere per square meter A/m2
magnetic ﬁeld strength ampere per meter A/m substance concentration mole per cubic meter mol/m3 luminance candela per square meter cd/m2
mass fraction kilogram per kilogram kg/kg = 1
velocity, meter per second with direction: m/s acceleration, meter per second squared and (longitude,latitude,azimuth) measured in radian: m/s2(r,r,r)
Preﬁx name deca hecto kilo mega giga Preﬁx symbol Factor 100 101 102 103 106 109
Preﬁx name tera peta exa zetta yotta Preﬁx symbol Factor 1012 1015 1018 1021 1024
The point in bringing this material is that when modelling, i.e., describing domains we must be extremely careful in not falling into the trap of modelling physics types, etc., as we do in programming – by simple Reals. We claim, without evidence, that many trivial programming mistakes are due to confusions between especially derived SI units, fractions and preﬁxes.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

4.4 Attributes 107
Preﬁx name deca hecto kilo mega giga Preﬁx symbol Factor 100 101 102 103 106 109
Preﬁx name tera peta exa zetta yotta Preﬁx symbol Factor 1012 1015 1018 1021 1024
Preﬁx name deci centi milli micro nano Preﬁx symbol Factor 100 10−1 10−2 10−3 10−6 10−9
Preﬁx name pico femto atto zepto yocto Preﬁx symbol Factor 10−12 10−15 10−18 10−21 10−24

4.4.4.2 Units are Indivisible
A volt, kg×m2×s−3×A−1, see Table 4.2, is “indivisible”. It is not a composite structure of mass, length, time, and electric current – in some intricate relationship.
Physical attributes may ascribe mass and volume to endurants. But they do not reveal the substance, i.e., the material from which the endurant is made. That is done by chemical attributes.

4.4.4.3 Chemical Elements
The chemical elements are, to us, what makes up a substance of MATTER. The mole, mol, substance is about chemical molecules. A mole contains exactly 6.02214076×1023 (the Avogadro number) constituent particles, usually atoms, molecules, or ions – of the elements, cf. ’The Periodic Table’, en.wikipedia.orgwiki/Periodic table, cf. Fig. 4.4. Any speciﬁc molecule is then a compound of two or more
elements, for example, calciumphosphat: Ca3(PO4)2. Moles bring substance to endurants. The physics attributes may ascribe weight and volume to endurants, but they do not explain what it is that gives weight, i.e., ﬁlls out the volume.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
108 4 DOMAINS – Towards a Statics Ontology Internal Qualities
207 number of lanes, 208 surface, 209 etc.;
208. SUR 209. ... value 207. attr NoL:H→NoL 208. attr SUR:H→SUR 209. ...
value 210. attr NoL:L→NoL 211. attr SUR:L→SUR 212. ...
Link attributes: 210 number of lanes, 211 surface. 212 etc.
216 Power 217 Fuel (Gasoline, Diesel, Electric,...) 218 Velocity, 219 Acceleration, ...
Automobile attributes: 213 Length 214 Width 215 Height
type 213. Length = Nat:cm 214. Width = Nat:cm 215. Height = Nat:cm 216. BHp = Nat:kg×m−2×s−3
value 213. attr Length: A→Length 214. attr Width: A→Width 215. attr Height: A→Height 216. attr BHp: A→BHp 217. attr Fuel: A→Fuel 218. attr Vel: A→Vel 219. attr Acc: A→Acc

4.4.5 Presentation of Physical Attributes
Physical attributes have several dimensions [i] First, as an example, there are the abstract physical units time interval, distance, mass, etc. [ii] Then, to continue with these units, there are the concrete physical units, e.g., s (second), e.g., m (meter) and, e.g., g (gramme). [iii] Finally there are the scales 10n, n a positive natural number, or n a negative such. We suggest that your abstract physical attribute type, A, embodies
220 of what abstract physical units it is, i.e., obs phys unit, 221 of what concrete physical units it is, i.e., obs conr unit, and 222 its scale, i.e., obs scale.
These sketched observer functions are partial as they are undeﬁned for non-physical attributes.

4.4.6 The Care and Feeding of Physical Attributes
The above, i.e., Sect. 4.4.5, suggests that we introduce the following analysis predicates and functions:
223 is physical attribute: A →Bool,
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

4.4 Attributes 109
224 analyse abs phys attr: A ∼→Abs Phys Attr 225 analyse conc phys attr: A ∼→Conc Phys Attr 226 analyse phys attr scale: A ∼→Phys Attr Scale
where the user then deﬁnes the concrete Abs Phys Attr, Conc Phys Attr and Phys Attr Scale types as per Sect. 4.4.5. Then we suggest that the user deﬁne a number of “conversion” functions:
convert from to(from concrete unit,to concrete unit): converts between concrete physical attributes, e.g., pounds and kilograms, meters and yards, meters and kilometers, gram and ounces, etc., add concrete values(v1,v2),subtract concrete values(v1,v2), multiply concrete values(v1,v2), etc. – you see what we mean !
We suggest that the domain analyser & describer, when professionally developing domain models for domains that can be characterised by some dominance of physical attribute endurants, be very careful in caring for their physical unit analysis & description. Many aircraft, train and power plant disasters can be referred back to software which handles physical units erroneously. We refer to [6, 74, 181] for more on this issue.

4.4.7 Artefactual Attributes
Despite our pragmatic decision to not distinguish between natural and artefactual parts, cf. Sect. 3.9.3 on Page 52, We shall now exemplify classes of attributes sˆolely on their parts being man-made. The reason for these exempliﬁcations is that we shall primarily advocate the application of domain analysis & description to domains on the basis of our interest in understanding their artefacts !

4.4.7.1 Examples of Artefactual Attributes
We exemplify some artefactual attributes.
Designs. Artefacts are man-made endurants. Hence “exhibit” a design. My three dimensional villa has ﬂoor plans, etc. The artefact attribute: ‘design’ can thus be presented by the architect’s or the construction engineer’s CAD/CAM drawings. States of an artefact, such as, for example, a road intersection (or railway track) trafﬁc signal; and Currency, e.g., Kr, $, , e , ¥, et cetera, used as an attribute36, say the cost of a train ticket. Artefactual Dimensions. Let the domain be that of industrial production whose attributes could then be: production: units produced per year, Units/Year; growth: increase in units produced per year, Units×Year−2; productivity: production per staff, Units×Year−1×Staff−1 — where the base for units and staff are natural numbers.
Document Artefactual Attributes
Example 63 Let us consider documents as artefactual parts. Typical document attributes are: (i) kind of document: book, report, pamphlet, letter and ticket, (ii) publication date, (iii) number of pages, (iv) author/publisher and (v) possible colophon information. All of these attributes are non-physics quantities.
Road Net Artefactual Attributes
Example 64 Hub attributes:
227 state: set of pairs of link identiﬁers from, respectively to which automobiles may traverse the hub; 228 state space: set of all possible hub states.
36 One could also consider a [10 e ] bank note to be an artefact, i.e., a part.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
110 4 DOMAINS – Towards a Statics Ontology Internal Qualities
type 227. HΣ = (LI×LI)-set 228. HΩ= HΣ-set
229 state: set of 0, 1, 2 or 3 pairs of adjacent hub identiﬁers, the link is closed, open in one direction (closed in the opposite), open in the other direction, or open in both directions; and 230 state space: set of all possible link states.
type 229. LΣ = (LI×LI)-set 230. LΩ= LΣ-set

4.4.8 Conjoin Attributes
This section is “conjoined” with Sect. 4.3.7 on Page 94. Part-materials conjoins, the atomic part and its one or more materials, enjoy some special attributes relations. We refer to Sect. 4.3.7’s Fig. 4.2 on Page 95. We observe there the following generic ﬂow-net conjoins: supply, pipe, pump, valve, join, fork, treat and dispose. For these we now suggest some archetypical conjoin part attributes. Indices i index join inlets: 1, 2 or more, and fork outlet: 1, 2, or more. If index is left out the conjoin unit has at most 1 inlet and at most one outlet.

4.4.8.1 Conjoin Attribute Categories
231 attr Substance: the substance name of the material that can be “carried” by the conjoin part unit. 232 attr Volume: volume of material that the conjoin part can take, measured say in m3; 233 attr Max In Flowi: typically a volume/sec quantity, measured as max in flowi : m3/sec;37
234 attr Max Out Flowi: as for in-ﬂow, but now for outlets: max out flowi : m3/sec;38
235 attr Curr In Flowi: typically a volume/sec quantity, measured as curr in flowi : m3/sec; 236 attr Curr Out Flowi: as for in-ﬂow, but now for outlets: curr out flowi : m3/sec; 237 Number of Flow Inlets: a natural number n, typically 1 or 2; 238 Number of Flow Outlets: a natural number n, typically 1 or 2; 239 attr Open Close: of a valve or pump, e.g., indicated as "open" or "closed";

4.4.8.2 Conjoin Attribute Assignments
supply: We assume a well of indeﬁnite capacity. attr Substance[s], attr Max Out Flow Mi, attr Curr Out Flow Mi. Possibly other attributes. pipe: We assume a pipe to be as a tube. attr Substance, attr Volume Substance, attr Max In Flow, attr Curr In Flow, attr Max Out Flow, attr Curr Out Flow. Possibly other attributes. pump: We assume a simple positive displacement pump. attr Substance, attr Volume Substance, attr Max In Flow, attr Curr In Flow, attr Max Out Flow, attr Curr Out Flow. attr Pumping Volume per Sec: attr Pumping Height: Possibly other attributes.
37 set by conjoin unit manufacturer to indicate maximum laminar ﬂow 38 set by conjoin unit manufacturer to indicate maximum laminar ﬂow
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

4.4 Attributes 111
valve: We assume a simple butterﬂy valve. attr Substance, attr Volume Substance, attr Max In Flow, attr Curr In Flow, attr Max Out Flow, attr Curr Out Flow, attr Open Close. Possibly other attributes. join: A join has 1 inlet and n outlets, for n usually being two. itemize attr Substance, attr Volume Substance, attr Max In Flow1, attr Max In Flow2, attr Curr In Flow1, attr Curr In Flow2, attr Max Out Flow, attr Curr Out Flow. Possibly other attributes. fork: A fork has one inlet and n outlets, for n usually being two. itemize attr Substance, attr Volume Substance, attr Max In Flow, attr Curr In Flow, attr Max Out Flow1, attr Max Out Flow2, attr Curr Out Flow1, attr Curr Out Flow2. Possibly other attributes. treat: Besides the attributes of the join and fork units, the treatment units are characterised by the operations that they can perform on their conjoined materials. Operations: Usually a treatment unit can perform one operation on its ‘embodied’ (conjoined) materials. But it is always good to generalise, so we say there there are n ≥1 operations. Each operation is characterised by a “recipe scaled” signature. m is the number of distinct materials, each of substance Substance i. fij is an appropriate fraction, 0 ≤fij ≤1. o1: Operation 1: f11 Substance 1 × f12 Substance 2 × ··· f1m Substance m o2: Operation 2: f21 Substance 1 × f22 Substance 2 × ··· f2m Substance m ... om: Operation n: fn1 Substance 1 × fn2 Substance 2 × ··· f2m Substance m Possibly other attributes. dispose: A disposal conjoin usually has indeﬁnite capacity (i.e., volume). attr Substance, attr Volume Substance, attr Max In Flow, attr Curr In Flow. Possibly other attributes.
We could likewise consider material-parts conjoins, but leave that to the reader.

4.4.9 Fuzzy Attributes
Fuzzy sets introduced, notably, by LotﬁZadeh [379, 1965]39 are somewhat like sets whose elements have degrees of membership. Fuzzy set is a mathematical model of vague qualitative or quantitative data, frequently generated by means of the natural language. We shall thus distinguish between fuzzy attribute values, i.e., vague qualitative values, and fuzzy attributes, i.e., vague quantitative types. Before Klaua and Zadeh fuzziness in logic had been studied as inﬁnite-valued logic Łukasiewicz40 and Alfred Tarski41.

4.4.9.0.1 Fuzzy Sets and Fuzzy Logic
We shall informally characterise fuzziness. In classical set theory an element is either a member of some set or it is not, i.e., true or false. In fuzzy set theory an element has a degree, indicated, for example, by a real number in the interval from and including 0 to and including 1. If membership degree is 0 the element is not in the set. If membership degree is 1 the element is certainly in the set. So when we speak of a fuzzy element, as being either of an attribute or an attribute value, then we should indicate its “membership degree”. For the logic of reasoning over fuzzy attribute values and fuzzy attributes we refer to classical textbooks on fuzzy logic and fuzzy sets, e.g., [254].
39 – and, it appears, also, same year, by Dieter Klaua, [260, 261]. 40 Hay, L.S., 1963, Axiomatization of the inﬁnite-valued predicate calculus. Journal of Symbolic Logic 28:7786. 41 Mancosu, Paolo; Zach, Richard; Badesa, Calixto (2004). Many-valued logics. The Development of Mathematical Logic from Russell to Tarski 1900-1935. The Development of Modern Logic. Oxford University Press. pp. 418420. ISBN 9780199722723.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
112 4 DOMAINS – Towards a Statics Ontology Internal Qualities

4.4.9.0.2 Fuzzy Attribute Types
So we can think of an attribute A as being fuzzy, is fuzzy(A) to mean that its values are fuzzy, i.e., lie in the open interval from and including 0 to and including 1.

4.4.9.0.3 Fuzzy Attribute Values
And these values can be represented, in RSL, by Reals:

4.4.9.0.4 Fuzzy Reasoning
A las, we shall not, in this monograph, explore the possibilities of modelling domains using Fuzzy Logic !
4.4.9.0.5 Fuzziness: A Possible Research Topic ?
Instead we urge readers to do so. The research ﬁeld of fuzzy sets, logic, systems and engineering is very large. We refer to such peer reviewed journals as
IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems, IEEE ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/RecentIssue.jsp?punumber=91; International Journal of Fuzzy Systems, Springer springer.com/journal/40815; Fuzzy Sets and Systems, Elsevier journals.elsevier.com/fuzzy-sets-and-systems; International Journal of Fuzzy Logic and Intelligent Systems, ijfis.org/main.html; Journal of Intelligent & Fuzzy Systems, content.iospress.com/journals/journal-of-intelligent-and-fuzzy-systems/P.

4.5 Intentionality
The conjoin concept, that of relating some endurants more strongly, in the form of conjoins, reﬂects one or more intentions. In the next section we shall encircle the ‘intention’ concept by quoting from Kai Sørlander’s Philosophy [345, 346, 347, 348].

4.5.1 Issues Leading Up to Intentionality
Causality of Purpose: If there is to be the possibility of language and meaning then there must exist primary entities which are not entirely encapsulated within the physical conditions; that they are stable and can inﬂuence one another. This is only possible if such primary entities are subject to a supplementary causality directed at the future: a causality of purpose. Living Species: These primary entities are here called living species. What can be deduced about them ? They are characterised by causality of purpose: they have some form they can be developed to reach; and which they must be causally determined to maintain; this development and maintenance must occur in an exchange of matter with an environment. It must be possible that living species occur in one of two forms: one form which is characterised by development, form and exchange, and another form which, additionally, can be characterised by the ability to purposeful movements. The ﬁrst we call plants, the second we call animals. Animate Entities: For an animal to purposefully move around there must be “additional conditions” for such self-movements to be in accordance with the principle of causality: they must have sensory organs sensing among others the immediate purpose of its movement; they must have means of motion so that it can move; and they must have instincts, incentives and feelings as causal conditions that what it senses can drive it to movements. And all of this in accordance with the laws of physics. Animals: To possess these three kinds of “additional conditions”, must be built from special units which have an inner relation to their function as a whole; Their purposefulness must be built into their physical building units, that is, as we can now say, their genomes. That is, animals are built from genomes which give them the inner determination to such building blocks for instincts, incentives and feelings. Similar kinds of deduction can be carried out with respect to plants. Transcendentally one can deduce basic principles of evolution but not its details. Humans – Consciousness and Learning: The existence of animals is a necessary condition for there being language and meaning in any world. That there can be language means that animals are capable of developing language.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

4.5 Intentionality 113
And this must presuppose that animals can learn from their experience. To learn implies that animals can feel pleasure and distaste and can learn. One can therefore deduce that animals must possess such building blocks whose inner determination is a basis for learning and consciousness. Language: Animals with higher social interaction uses signs, eventually developing a language. These languages adhere to the same system of deﬁned concepts which are a prerequisite for any description of any world: namely the system that philosophy lays bare from a basis of transcendental deductions and the principle of contradiction and its implicit meaning theory. A human is an animal which has a language. Knowledge: Humans must be conscious of having knowledge of its concrete situation, and as such that human can have knowledge about what he feels and eventually that human can know whether what he feels is true or false. Consequently a human can describe his situation correctly. Responsibility: In this way one can deduce that humans can thus have memory and hence can have responsibility, be responsible. Further deductions lead us into ethics.
We shall not further develop the theme of living species: plants and animals, thus excluding, most notably humans, in this chapter. We claim that the present chapter, due to its foundation in Kai Sørlander’s Philosophy, provides a ﬁrm foundation within which we, or others, can further develop this theme: analysis & description of living species.
Intentionality: Intentionality as a philosophical concept is deﬁned by the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy42 as “the power of minds to be about, to represent, or to stand for, things, properties and states of affairs.” Intentional Pull: Two or more artefactual parts of different sorts, but with overlapping sets of intents may excert an intentional “pull” on one another. This intentional “pull” may take many forms. Let px : X and py : Y be two parts of different sorts (X,Y), and with common intent, ι. Manifestations of these, their common intent must somehow be subject to constraints, and these must be expressed predicatively. When a composite or conjoin artefact models “itself” as put together with a number of other endurants then it does have an intentionality and the components’ individual intentionalities does, i.e., shall relate to that. The composite road transport system has intentionality of the road serving the automobile part, and the automobiles have the intent of being served by the roads, across “a divide”, and vice versa, the roads of serving the automobiles. Natural endurants, for example, rivers, lakes, seas43 and oceans become, in a way, artefacts with and when mankind using them for transport; natural gas becomes an artefact when drilled for, exploited and piped; and harbours make no sense without artefactual boats sailing on the natural water. This, perhaps vague, concept of intentionality has yet to be developed into something of a theory. Despite that this is yet to be done, cf. Exercise 12 on Page 121, we shall proceed to deﬁne an intentionality analysis function. First we postulate a set of intent designators. An intent designator is really a further undeﬁned quantity. But let us, for the moment, think of them as simple character strings, that is, literals, for example "road", "hub", "link", "automobile", "transport", etc.
Analysis Function Prompt 13 analyse intentionality:
The domain analyser analyses an endurant as to the a ﬁnite number of intents, zero or more, with which the analyser judges the endurant can be associated. The method provides the domain analysis prompt:
analyse intentionality directs the domain analyser to observe a set of intents.
value analyse intentionality(e) ≡{i 1,i 2,...,i n}⊆Intent
Example 65 We illustrate the concept of intentional “pull”:
42 Jacob, P. (Aug 31, 2010). Intentionality. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (https://seop.illc.uva.nl/entries/intentionality/) October 15, 2014, retrieved April 3, 2018. 43 Seas are smaller than oceans and are usually located where the land and ocean meet. Typically, seas are partially enclosed by land. The Sargasso Sea is an exception. It is deﬁned only by ocean currents [oceanservice.noaa.gov/facts/oceanorsea.html].
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
114 4 DOMAINS – Towards a Statics Ontology Internal Qualities
240 automobiles include the intent of ’transport’, 241 and so do hubs and links.
240 analyse intentionality: A →("transport"|...)-set 241 analyse intentionality: H →("transport"|...)-set 241 analyse intentionality: L →("transport"|...)-set
Manifestations of "transport" is reﬂected in automobiles having the automobile position attribute, APos, Item 199 Pg. 101, hubs having the hub trafﬁc attribute, H Trafﬁc, Item 187 Pg. 99, and in links having the link trafﬁc attribute, L Trafﬁc, Item 191 Pg. 100.
242 Seen from the point of view of an automobile there is its own trafﬁc history, A Hist, which is a (time ordered) sequence of timed automobile’s positions; 243 seen from the point of view of a hub there is its own trafﬁc history, H Trafﬁc Item 187 Pg. 99, which is a (time ordered) sequence of timed maps from automobile identities into automobile positions; and 244 seen from the point of view of a link there is its own trafﬁc history, L Trafﬁc Item 191 Pg. 100, which is a (time ordered) sequence of timed maps from automobile identities into automobile positions.
The intentional “pull” of these manifestations is this:
245 The union, i.e. proper merge of all automobile trafﬁc histories, AllATH, must now be identical to the same proper merge of all hub, AllHTH, and all link trafﬁc histories, AllLTH.
type 242 A Hi = (T × APos)∗
187 H Trf = A UI → m (TIME × APos)∗
191 L Trf = A UI→ m (TIME×APos)∗
245 AllATH=TIME→ m (AUI→ m APos) 245 AllHTH=TIME→ m (AUI→ m APos) 245 AllLTH=TIME→ m (AUI→ m APos) axiom 245 let allA=mrg AllATH({(a,attr A Hi(a))|a:A•a ∈as}), 245 allH=mrg AllHTH({attr H Trf(h)|h:H•h ∈hs}), 245 allL =mrg AllLTH({attr L Trf(l)|l:L•h ∈ls}) in 245 allA = mrg HLT(allH,allL) end
We leave the deﬁnition of the four merge functions to the reader !
Discussion: We endow each automobile with its history of timed positions and each hub and link with their histories of timed automobile positions. These histories are facts ! They are not something that is laboriously recorded, where such recordings may be imprecise or cumbersome44. The facts are there, so we can (but may not necessarily) talk about these histories as facts. It is in that sense that the purpose (‘transport’) for which man let automobiles, hubs and link be made with their ‘transport’ intent are subject to an intentional “pull”. It can be no other way: if automobiles “record” their history, then hubs and links must together “record” identically the same history!.
Please note, that intents are not [thought of as] attributes. We consider intents to be a fourth, a comprehensive internal quality of endurants. They, so to speak, govern relations between the three other internal quality of endurants: the unique identiﬁers, the mereologies and the attributes. That is, they predicate them, “arrange” their comprehensiveness. Much more should be said about intentionality. It is a truly, I believe, worthy research topic of its own. We refer to Exercise 12 on Page 121.
An Aspect of Comprehensivess of Internal Qualities
Example 66 Let us illustrate the issues “at play” here.
Consider a road transport system uod. Applying analyse intentionality(uod) may yield the set {"transport", ...}. Consider a ﬁnancial service industry, fss.
44 or thought technologically in-feasible – at least some decades ago!
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

4.5 Intentionality 115
Applying analyse intentionality(fss) may yield the set {"interest on deposit", ...}. Consider a health care system, hcs. Applying analyse intentionality(hcs) may yield the set {"cure diseases", ...}.
What these analyses of intentionality yields, with respect to expressing intentional pull, is entirely of the discretion of the domain analyser & describer
We bring the above example, Example 66 on the preceding page, to indicate, as the name of the example reveals, “An Aspect of Comprehensivess of Internal Qualities”. That the various components of artefactual systems relate in – further to be explored – ways. In this respect, performing domain analysis & description is not only an engineering pursuit, but also one of research. We leave it to the readers to pursue this research aspect of domain analysis & description – while referring to Exercise 12 on Page 121.

4.5.2 Artefacts
Humans create artefacts – for a reason, to serve a purpose, that is, with intent. Artefacts are like parts. They satisfy the laws of physics – and serve a purpose, fulﬁll an intent.

4.5.3 Assignment of Attributes
So what can we deduce from the above, a little more than two pages ? The attributes of natural parts and natural materials are generally of such concrete types – expressible as some real with a dimension45 of the International System of Units: https://physics.nist.gov/cuu/Units/units.html. Attribute values usually enter differential equations and integrals, that is, classical calculus. The attributes of humans, besides those of parts, signiﬁcantly includes one of a usually non-empty set of intents. In directing the creation of artefacts humans create these with an intent.
Intentional Pull, II
Example 67 These are examples of human intents: they create roads and automobiles with the intent of transport, they create houses with the intents of living, ofﬁces, production, etc., and they create pipelines with the intent of oil or gas transport
Human attribute values usually enter into modal logic expressions.
4.5.3.1 Artefacts, including Man-made Materials:
Artefacts, besides those of parts, signiﬁcantly includes a usually singleton set of intents.
Example 68 Roads and automobiles possess the intent of transport; houses possess either one of the intents of living, ofﬁces, production; and pipelines possess the intent of oil or gas transport.
Artefact attribute values usually enter into mathematical logic expressions. We leave it to the reader to formulate attribute assignment principles for plants and non-human animals.
45 Basic units are meter, kilogram, second, Ampere, Kelvin, mole, and candela. Some derived units are: Newton: kg×m×s−2, Weber: kg×m2 ×s−2 ×A−1, etc.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
116 4 DOMAINS – Towards a Statics Ontology Internal Qualities

4.5.4 Galois Connections
Galois Theory was ﬁrst developed by ´Evariste Galois [1811-1832] around 183046. Galois theory emphasizes a notion of Galois connections. We refer to standard textbooks on Galois Theory, e.g., [351, 2009].

4.5.4.1 Galois Theory: An Ultra-brief Characterisation
To us, an essence of Galois connections can be illustrated as follows:
Let us observe47 properties of a number of endurants, say in the form of attribute types. Let the function F map sets of entities to the set of common attributes. Let the function G map sets of attributes to sets of entities that all have these attributes. (F,G ) is a Galois connection if, when including more entities, the common attributes remain the same or fewer, and if when including more attributes, the set of entities remain the same or fewer. (F,G ) is monotonously decreasing.
There is a collection of LEGO™blocks. From this collection, A, we identify the red square blocks, e. That is F(A) is B = {attr Color(e) = red,attr Form(e)=square}. We now add all the blue square blocks. And obtain A′. Now the common properties are their squareness: F(A′) is B′ = {attr Form(e)=square}. More blocks as argument to F yields fewer or the same number of properties. The more entities we observe, the fewer common attributes they possess.
Civil Engineering: Consultants and Contractors
Example 70 Less playful, perhaps more seriously, and certainly more relevant to our endeavour, is this next example.
Let X be the set of civil engineering, i.e., building, consultants, i.e., those who, like architects and structural engineers design buildings – of whatever kind. Let Y be the set of building contractors, i.e., those ﬁrms who actually implement, i.e., build to, those designs. Now a subset, Xbridges of X, contain exactly those consultants who specialise in the design of bridges, with a subset, Ybridges, of Y capable of building bridges. If we change to a subset, X′′ = Xbridges,tunnels of X, allowing the design of both bridges and tunnels, then we obtain a corresponding subset, Ybridges,tunnels, of Y. So when we enlarge the number of properties from ‘bridges’ to ‘bridges and tunnels’, we reduce, most likely, the number of contractors able to fulﬁll such properties, and vice versa, then we have a Galois Connection.
46 en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Galois theory 47 The following is an edited version of an explanation kindly provided by Asger Eir, e-mail, June 5, 2020 [142, 143, 82]. 48 From E-mail, Asger Eir, June 5, 2020
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

4.6 Systems Modelling 117

4.5.4.2 Galois Connections and Intentionality
We have a hunch 50! Namely that there are some sort of Galois Connections with respect to intentionality.
4.5.4.3 Galois Connections and Intentionality: A Possible Research Topic ?
We leave to to the interested reader to pursue this line of inquiry.

4.6 Systems Modelling

4.6.1 General
In Sect. 4.3.7, as well as in numerous examples we started to reveal some “classes” of domains for the modelling of which it appears that there are some “standard” techniques. For general, usually bi-directed networks of usually atomic parts, we analysed & described these graphs into sets of units whose mereology “revealed” their “interconnection”. For less general, usually directed, acyclic networks of usually conjoins, we analysed & described these graphs also into sets of units, now the conjoins, whose mereology now “revealed” their “interconnection”. For less topologically, more conceptually and intentionally related aggregations51 of endurants, we analysed & described as possibly hierarchically organised composite endurants, whose mereology, in their way, “revealed” the “interconnection” of the aggregations.

4.6.2 Passively Mobile Endurants
Some endurants are mobile. Mobile endurants are either actively mobile, i.e., move on their own accord, or passively mobile, i.e., are transported by other endurants. Usually passively mobile endurants are expressed as siblings of part-parts conjoins – where the ‘parts’ usually consist of a deﬁnite number of these: usually zero, one or two.
Credit Card Shopping System
Example 71 A credit card shopping system52 consists of (i) credit card (user)s, (ii) shops and (iii) credit card honoring banks. The shops offer for sale and users hoard merchandise. We suggest to model, as a fourth element of the system, (iv) the merchandise. And let credit card user and shop attributes reﬂect their merchandise by their unique identiﬁers.
Container Terminal Port
Example 72 A container terminal port53 consists of (i) vessels, (ii) vessel to/from quay cranes, (iii) quay crane to/from stack trucks, (iv) stack or land truck to/from stack cranes, (v) stacks, and (vi) land trucks. Vessels and stacks hold any number of containers over indeﬁnite time intervals. Cranes and trucks hold zero, one or two containers over expectedly short time intervals.We suggest to model, as a seventh element, of a container terminal port (vii) containers; then let vessel, crane, truck and stack attributes reﬂect their zero or more containers by their unique identiﬁers.
General Hospital System
50 Hunch: a feeling or guess based on intuition rather than fact. 51 for lack of a better term 52 See imm.dtu.dk/˜dibj/2016/credit/accs.pdf 53 See imm.dtu.dk/˜dibj/2018/yangshan/maersk-pa.pdf
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
118 4 DOMAINS – Towards a Statics Ontology Internal Qualities
Example 73 A general hospital consists of (i) beds, (ii) staff, and (iii) patients. Patients occupy beds are operated upon by medical doctor staff, are otherwise cared for my nurse staff, et cetera. We suggest to model occupants of beds, patients on operating tables, and patients being cared for by nurses by unique patient identiﬁers.
Thus we suggest the following modelling choices: Actively mobile endurants shall be transcendentally deduced into behaviours. Passively mobile endurants if “embodied” by actively mobile endurants, shall not. If, instead, these passively mobile endurants are modelled as a major set of endurants of their domain they will be modelled as behaviours – with few other actions than responding to “who, at the moment, transports them”. All this should be clear after Chapter 6.

4.7 Discussion of Endurants
Domain descriptions are, as we have already shown, formulated, both informally and formally, by means of abstract types, that is, by sorts for which no concrete models are usually given. Sorts are made to denote possibly empty, possibly inﬁnite, rarely singleton, sets of entities on the basis of the qualities deﬁned for these sorts, whether external or internal. By junk we shall understand that the domain description unintentionally denotes undesired entities. By confusion we shall understand that the domain description unintentionally have two or more identiﬁcations of the same entity or type. The question is can we formulate a [formal] domain description such that it does not denote junk or confusion ? The short answer to this is no ! So, since one naturally wishes “no junk, no confusion” what does one do ? The answer to that is one proceeds with great care !
4.8 A Domain Discovery Process, II
We shall again emhasize some aspects of the domain analyser & describer method. A method principle is that of exhaustively analyse & describe all internal qualities of the domain under scrutiny. A method technique implied here is that sketched below. The method tools are here all the analysis and description prompts covered so far. The predecessor of this section is Sect. 3.19 on Page 75. Please be reminded of Discovery Schema 0’s declaration of Notice Board variables (Page 75). In this section we collect (i) the description of unique identiﬁers of all parts of the state; (ii) the description of mereologies of all parts of the state; and (iii) the description of attributes of all parts of the state. (iii) We ﬁnally gather these into the discover internal endurant qualities procedures.
An Endurant Internal Qualities Domain Analysis and Description Process
discover uids: Unit →Unit discover uids() ≡
do txt := txt † [type name(v)7→txt(type name(v))b⟨describe unique identiﬁer(v)⟩] end discover mereologies: Unit →Unit discover mereologies() ≡
do txt := txt † [type name(v)7→txt(type name(v))b⟨describe mereology(v)⟩] end discover attributes: Unit →Unit discover attributes() ≡
do txt := txt † [type name(v)7→txt(type name(v))b⟨describe attributes(v)⟩] end
discover internal endurant qualities: Unit →Unit
discover internal endurant qualities() ≡
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

4.10 Summary 119
axiom [ all parts have unique identiﬁers ] discover mereologies() ;
axiom [ all unique identiﬁers are mentioned in sum total of ]
[ all mereologies and no isolated proper sets of parts ] discover attributes() ;
axiom [ sum total of all attributes span all parts of the state ]
We shall comment on the axioms in the next section.

4.9 Domain Description Laws
The axioms of the immediately above Discovery Schema expresses some domain facts: [i] the uniqueness of part identiﬁers; [ii] that mereologies mention all parts and that the mereologies of no proper subset of parts subset of parts refer only to parts of that subset; and [iii] that part attributes, when they refer, refer only to parts of the state.

4.10 Summary
This chapter’s main title was: DOMAINS – Towards a Statics Ontology. The term ‘statics’ pertain to qualities of the ‘Domain’, not to its ‘Ontology’. So, an aspect of the ontology of a domain, such as we have studied it and such as we ordain one aspect of domain analysis & description, is about somehow measurable properties, or about historical actions and events to which endurants of the domain have been subjected, that is, the internal qualities. For that study & practice we have suggested a number of analysis & description prompts.

4.10.1 The Description Schemas
We have culminated this chapter with description prompts for unique identiﬁer description schema 7 on Page 86, mereology description schema 8 on Page 91 and attribute description schema 9 on Page 97. They all describe in, in our case RSL, the domain description text to ‘produce’ when internal quality analysing & describing a given endurant; but what about the description of those endurants revealed by the analysis & description of that given endurant? The answer is simple. That is up to you ! The domain analysis & description method gives you the tools, some techniques and a few principles. But:
A principle of the method could be to secure that all relevant, i.e., implied, endurants are analysed & described. A technique could be to, somehow, “set aside” all those endurants revealed by the analysis & description of any given endurant – with the proviso that no endurant, of type, for example, P, is analysed & described more than once.
Same answer that we gave in Sect. 3.21.1 Page 78. A technique, such as alluded to above, is show ‘formalised’ in the pseudo-program of Sect. 4.8 on the preceding page.

4.10.2 Modelling Choices
In this chapter we have put forward some advice on description choices: We refer to Modelling Choices 8 on Page 91 and 9 on Page 97. The analysis predicates and functions are merely aids. They do not effect descriptions, but descriptions are based on the result of their inquiry. Real decisions are made when effecting a description function. So the rˆole of these modelling choice paragraphs is to alert the describer to make judicious choices.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
120 4 DOMAINS – Towards a Statics Ontology Internal Qualities
4.10.3 Method Principles, Techniques and Tools
Recall that by a method we shall understand a set of principles for selecting and applying a set of techniques using a set of tools in order to construct an artefact.

4.10.3.1 Principles of Internal Qualities
In this chapter we have illustrated the use of the following techniques:
Divide and Conquer: Application of this principle has in this chapter been quite pronounced: the ‘divisions’ are those of ﬁrst (i) the analysis & description of unique identiﬁcation, then (ii) the analysis & description of mereologies, and then, ﬁnally, (iii) the analysis & description of attributes – and in that order. We have found, in numerous case studies [80], that any other “strict” order very often brings confusion!54
Representational Abstract: Application of this principle has,in this chapter, been to the type deﬁnitions of unique identiﬁers, mereologies and attributes. For unique identiﬁers in that no representation need be prescribed. For mereologies in that all we are really interested in are which parts “partake” in part-to-part relations. For attributes we have not directed the domain analyser cum describer as how express possible attribute type expressions, and often we just identify an attribute type by its identiﬁer.

4.10.3.2 Techniques of Internal Qualities
In this chapter we have illustrated the use of the following principles:
Invariants: We remind the reader of Item 50 on Page 8, and refer to Example 43 on Page 89: Uniqueness of Road Net Identiﬁers, Example 47 on Page 91: Invariance of Road Nets and Example 58 on Page 100: Invariance of Road Net Trafﬁc States. Intentional Pull : We remind the reader of Item 49 on Page 8, and refer to Example 65 on Page 113: Intentional Pull, I and Example 67 on Page 115: Intentional Pull, II.

4.10.3.3 Tools

4.10.3.3.1 Summary of The Internal Qualities Analysis Calculus
analyse attribute types and Page 96 is physical attribute. Page 108

4.10.3.3.2 Summary of The Internal Qualities Description Calculus
describe unique identifier, Page 86 describe mereology and Page 91 describe attributes. Page 97

4.11 Bibliographical Notes
We refer to [70, Sect. 5.3] for a thorough, 2016–2017, ﬁve page review of types in formal speciﬁcation and programming languages.
54 “Eager-beaver”, inventive “whiz kids” are often caught up in their creativeness and muddles matters up, forgets careful and necessary analyses whose absence often shows up late, and much analysis & description work has to be redone !
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

4.12 Exercise Problems 121

4.12 Exercise Problems

4.12.1 Research Problems
Exercise 11 A Research Challenge. Fuzzy Descriptions: Experiment with, present examples, and, possibly, develop analysis & description prompts for Fuzzy attributes.
Exercise 12 A Research Challenge. Intentionality: Suggest possible intentions and possible intentional pulls for domains of artefacts, say as they are mentioned in the Term Projects section. Present possible examples. More generally, develop a theory of intentionality.
Exercise 13 A Research Challenge. Galois Connections: Study Galois Connections as, for example presented in [158, Ganter & Wille]. Then search for such connections with respect to internal qualities of pairs of different sort discrete endurants. Present examples. Suggest possible [?] analysis & description prompts.
Exercise 14 A PhD Student Problem. Living Species: Humans: Suggest an outline mereology and attribute concepts for humans.
Exercise 15 A PhD Student Problem. Michael Jackson’s Categories of Attributes: Suggest a critique of Jackson’s categories of attributes, cf. Sect. 4.4.2.3.
Is Jackson’s categorisation equally applicable to natural parts as well as to discrete artefacts ? Somehow or other, do discrete artefacts mandate a different categorisation? Suggest a categorisation for discrete artefacts.

4.12.2 Student Exercises
Exercise 16 An MSc Student Exercise. Unique Document Identiﬁcation: We refer to Exercise 3 on Page 81. [Q1] you are to narrate and formalise unique identiﬁcation for persons and documents. We refer to upcoming Exercises 17, 18 on the next page and Exercise 29 on Page 163.
Exercise 17 An MSc Student Exercise. Document System Mereologies: We refer to Exercises 3 on Page 81 and 16. We anticipate and elaborate on the actions that Exercise 29 on Page 163 will be handling.
create: The thus created document shall record (i) the identity of its [person] creator, (ii) time of creation, and (iii) the text it now contains. edit: The thus edited document shall record (i) the identity of its [person] editor, (ii) the time of edit, and (iii) the changes being made to the master document, whose text is τM, being edited into the edited document, whose text is τE, such that these changes can be “seen” – for example as follows: there is a “forward” editing function, eF, and an “undo” editing function, eU, such that the text now recorded, in the edited document, is eF(τM), and such that eU(eF(τM))=τM.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
122 4 DOMAINS – Towards a Statics Ontology Internal Qualities
read: The thus read document shall record (i) the identity of its [person] reader and (ii) the time of read. copy: As a result of a copy we now have one more document in our system: besides the document, the original, we now also have the copy. The original document shall record (i) the identity of its [person] who had copied this document, (ii) the identity of the copy, and (iii) the time of copying. The copy document shall record (i) the identity of its [person] who made this copy, (ii) the identity of the original document (from which it was made), and (iii) the time of copying. shred: Let the identity of the document being shredded be dι. Whereas there was a document of that identity, i.e., dι, there is, “ofﬁcially”, no longer such a document. But, since persons can talk about the historical existence of dι, we may have to keep track of all shredded documents. See question [Q2] of Exercise 3 on Page 81. Therefore documents in such a “shredded” document archive must record (i) the identity of the person who did the shredding and (ii) the time of shredding.
[Q1] you are to narrate and formalise mereologies for persons and documents. We refer to upcoming Exercises 18 and 29 on Page 163.
Exercise 18 An MSc Student Exercise. Document System Attributes: We refer to Exercises 3 on Page 81 and 16 on the preceding page. In addressing question [Q1] below you will have studied the indented text of Exercise 17 on the previous page. [Q1] you are to narrate and formalise attributes for persons and documents. We refer to upcoming Exercise 29 on Page 163.
Exercise 19 An MSc Student Exercise. A Simple Consumer–Bank–Retailer Credit Card System: The credit card system involves consumers, retailers banks and credit cards. A credit card is an attribute of consumers, one per consumer. Consumers have bank accounts, one per consumer. Retailers stock merchandise for sale, all merchandise are distinct, and have a price tag. Retailers have bank accounts, one per retailer. Banks hold accounts for consumers and retailers. Credit cards identify their [consumer] holder, one per credit card. Now to the problem to be solved. Please note item [g] before you start writing down your solutions. You are to formulate [a] appropriate sorts for consumers, retailers and banks as parts; [b] appropriate sets of unique identiﬁers, mereologies and [c] attributes for consumers, retailers and banks; You are to express appropriate well-formedness conditions for [d] all mereologies and [e] all attributes. You are to express an intentional pull [f] relating the bank balances of consumers and retailers. While doing this, you are to [g] spot what might, inadvertently, have been left out in the above, ﬁrst paragraphs ‘presentation’ of this, albeit simple consumer-retailer-bank credit card system.

4.12.3 Term Projects
We continue the term projects of Sect. 3.23.3 on Page 82. For the speciﬁc domain topic that a group is working on it is to treat, for example, in separate weeks, these topics in the order listed: unique identiﬁers, cf. Sect. 4.2, mereology, cf. Sect. 4.3, and attributes, cf. Sect. 4.4, the latter possibly over two weeks.
Exercise 20 An MSc Student Exercise. The Consumer Market, Internal Qualities: We refer to Exercise 4 on Page 83. You are, in turn, to analyse and describe
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

4.12 Exercise Problems 123
the unique identiﬁers, mereologies, a suitable sample of attributes, and possible intentional pulls
of consumer markets.
Exercise 21 An MSc Student Exercise. Financial Service Industry, Internal Qualities: We refer to Exercise 5 on Page 83. You are, in turn, to analyse and describe the unique identiﬁers, mereologies, a suitable sample of attributes, and possible intentional pulls
of ﬁnancial service industries.
Exercise 22 An MSc Student Exercise. Container Line Industry, Internal Qualities: We refer to Exercise 6 on Page 83. You are, in turn, to analyse and describe the unique identiﬁers, mereologies, a suitable sample of attributes, and possible intentional pulls
Exercise 23 An MSc Student Exercise. Railway Systems, Internal Qualities: We refer to Exercise 7 on Page 83. You are, in turn, to analyse and describe the unique identiﬁers, mereologies, a suitable sample of attributes, and possible intentional pulls
Exercise 24 A PhD Student Problem. Part-Material Conjoins: Canals, Internal Qualities: We refer to Example 8 on Page 83. You are, in turn, to analyse and describe the unique identiﬁers, mereologies, a suitable sample of attributes, and possible intentional pulls
Exercise 25 A PhD Student Problem. Part-Materials Conjoins: Rum Production, Internal Qualities: We refer to Exercise 9 on Page 83. You are, in turn, to analyse and describe the unique identiﬁers, mereologies, a suitable sample of attributes, and possible intentional pulls
Exercise 26 A PhD Student Problem. Part-Materials Conjoins: Waste Management, Internal Qualities: We refer to Exercise 10 on Page 83. You are, in turn, to analyse and describe the unique identiﬁers, mereologies, a suitable sample of attributes, and possible intentional pulls
of waste management.
These exercise problems are continued in Sects. 6.14.3 on Page 163, 7.11.2 on Page 195 and 8.9.2 on Page 243.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark

TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION
In this chapter we discuss the concept of transcendental deduction.
It should be clear to the reader that in domain analysis & description we are reﬂecting on a number of philosophical issues; ﬁrst and foremost on those of ontology. For this chapter we reﬂect on a sub-ﬁeld of epistemology, we reﬂect on issues of transcendental nature. Should you wish to follow-up on the concept of transcendentality, we refer to [191, Immanuel Kant], [242, Oxford Companion to Philosophy, pp 878–880], [12, The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy, pp 807–810],[110, The Blackwell Dictionary of Philosophy, pp 54–55 (1998)], [348, Sørlander] and Chapter 1.
Deﬁnition: 66 Transcendental, II: By transcendental we shall understand the philosophical notion: the a priori or intuitive basis of knowledge, independent of experience
A priori knowledge or intuition is central: By a priori we mean that it not only precedes, but also determines rational thought.
Deﬁnition: 67 Transcendental Deduction, II: By a transcendental deduction we shall understand the philosophical notion: a transcendental “conversion” of one kind of knowledge into a seemingly different kind of knowledge
Some Transcendental Deductions
Example 74 We give some intuitive examples of transcendental deductions. They are from the “domain” of programming languages. There is the syntax of a programming language, and there are the programs that supposedly adhere to this syntax. Given that, the following are now transcendental deductions.
The software tool, a syntax checker, that takes a program and checks whether it satisﬁes the syntax, including the statically decidable context conditions, i.e., the statics semantics – that tool is one of several forms of transcendental deductions.
The software tools, an automatic theorem prover1and a model checker, for example SPIN [241], that takes a program and some theorem, respectively a Promela statement, and proves, respectively checks, the program correct with respect the theorem, or the statement.
A compiler and an interpreter for any programming language. Yes, indeed, any abstract interpretation [129, 96] reﬂects a transcendental deduction: ﬁrstly, these examples show that there are many transcendental deductions; secondly, they show that there is no single-most preferred transcendental deduction.
A transcendental deduction, crudely speaking, is just any abstraction that can be “linked” to another, not by logical necessity, but by logical (and philosophical) possibility !
Deﬁnition: 68 Transcendentality: By transcendentality we shall here mean the philosophical notion: the state or condition of being transcendental
1 ACL2 [258], Coq [28], Isabelle/HOL [299], STeP [93], PVS [303] and Z3 [94]
126 5 TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION
Example 75 We can speak of a bus in at least three senses:
(i) The bus as it is being "maintained, serviced, refueled"; (ii) the bus as it "speeds" down its route; and (iii) the bus as it "appears" (listed) in a bus time table.
The three senses are:
(i) as an endurant (here a part), (ii) as a perdurant (as we shall see, a behaviour), and (iii) as an attribute2.
The above example, we claim, reﬂects transcendentality as follows:
(i) We have knowledge of an endurant (i.e., a part) being an endurant. (ii) We are then to assume that the perdurant referred to in (ii) is an aspect of the endurant mentioned in (i) – where perdurants are to be assumed to represent a different kind of knowledge. (iii) And, ﬁnally, we are to further assume that the attribute mentioned in (iii) is somehow related to both (i) and (ii) – where at least this attribute is to be assumed to represent yet a different kind of knowledge.
In other words: two (i–ii) kinds of different knowledge; that they relate must indeed be based on a priori knowledge. Someone claims that they relate ! The two statements (i–ii) are claimed to relate transcendentally.3
2 – in this case rather: as a fragment of a bus time table attribute. 3 – the attribute statement was “thrown” in “for good measure”, i.e., to highlight the issue !
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41
DOMAINS – Towards a Dynamics Ontology: Perdurants
In this chapter we transcendentally “morph” parts into behaviours. We analyse that notion and its constituent notions of actors, channels and communication, actions and events.
The main transcendental deduction of this chapter is that of associating with each part a behaviour. This section shows the details of that association. Perdurants are understood in terms of a notion of state and a notion of time.

6.1 Structure of this Chapter
In order to culminate, in Sect. 6.7 we need to treat a number of pre-requisite topics. There are quite a few of these, so a summary-of-what-is-to-come seems reasonable.
Section 6.2 covers primarily the notion of domain states in the form of CSP variables – one for each of the parts having monitorable attributes; Sect. 6.3 surveys the notions of actors, actions, events and behaviours; Sect. 6.4 discuss the modelling of concurrent domain behaviours in terms of CSP processes – with brief subsections on CSP and Petri nets; Sect. 6.5 then introduces the notions of CSP channels, output and input – to model interaction between domain behaviours; Sect. 6.6 discusses action, event and behaviour signatures in general; Sect. 6.7 is now ready to tackle the important issue of deﬁning domain behaviours, including their signatures; Sect. 6.8 shows how to express the initialisation of a running domain behaviour; Sect. 6.10 loosely discusses the modelling of domain actions; while Sect. 6.11 brieﬂy touches upon the modelling of domain events. Finally Sect. 6.12 follows up on the domain discovery process of Sects. 3.19 and 4.8.
Other sections provide elucidation or summary observations.

6.2 States and Time
We ﬁrst covered the notions of state in Sects. 1.3.2.7 on Page 14 and 3.18 on Page 73 and time in Sect. 2.5 on Page 24.

6.2.1 The Issue of States
Example 39 on Page 74 illustrated the idea of expressing the values of all parts having dynamic attributes. We refer to [176] and Appendix Sect. D.6.2 on Page 325. RSL variables of the form:
variable parts[uid P(p)]:P := p
0 The ‘Dynamics’ refer back to ‘DOMAINS’ – not to ‘Ontology’ !
128 6 DOMAINS – Towards a Dynamics Ontology: Perdurants
are to be declared to model parts that have monitorable attributes; informally:
value has monitorable attributes: P →Bool has monitorable attributes(p) ≡ ∃A • A ∈analyse attributes types(p) • is monitorable(attr A(p))
possible variable declaration: P →RSL-Text possible variable declaration(p) ≡ if has monitorable attributes(p) then ❝variable p[uid P(p)]:P := p ❞end
analyse attribute types is deﬁned in domain analysis function prompt 12 on Page 96.
declaring all monitorable variables
Translation Schema 1 When we have ‘collected’ all external endurant descriptions
246 we can, for any given endurant, e, typically a universe of discourse domain, 247 calculate all relevant monitorable variable declarations; 248 that is, for those parts, p, 249 that have monitorable-only attributes.
247. declaring all monitorable variables: E →RSL-Text 247. declaring all monitorable variables(e) ≡ 248. let ps = calc parts(e) in 248. for ∀p • p ∈ps do possible variable declaration(p) 247. end end
State Values versus State Variables
Example 76 Item 132 on Page 74 expresses the value of all parts of a road transport system:
250 We now introduce the set of variables, one for each part value of the domain being modelled.
250. { variable vp:(UoB|H|L|BC|B|A) | vp:(UoB|H|L|BC|B|A) • vp∈ps }

6.2.2 Time Considerations
We shall, without loss of generality, assume that actions and events are atomic and that behaviours are composite. Atomic perdurants may “occur” during some time interval, but we omit consideration of and concern for what actually goes on during such an interval. Composite perdurants can be analysed into “constituent” actions, events and “sub-behaviours”. We shall also omit consideration of temporal properties of behaviours. Instead we shall refer to two seminal monographs: Specifying Systems [263, Leslie Lamport] and Duration Calculus: A Formal Approach to Real-Time Systems [380, Zhou ChaoChen and Michael Reichhardt Hansen] (and [41, Chapter 15]). For a seminal book on “time in computing” we refer to the eclectic [156, Mandrioli et al., 2012]. And for seminal book on time at the epistemology level we refer to [353, J. van Benthem, 1991].
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41
6.3 Actors, Actions, Events and Behaviours: A Preview 129
6.3 Actors, Actions, Events and Behaviours: A Preview
To us perdurants are further, pragmatically, analysed into actions, events, and behaviours. We shall deﬁne these terms below. Common to all of them is that they potentially change a state. Actions and events are here considered atomic perdurants. For behaviours we distinguish between discrete and continuous behaviours.

6.3.1 Actors
Deﬁnition: 69 Actor: By an actor we shall understand something that is capable of initiating and carrying out actions, events and behaviours
The notion of “carrying out” will be made clear in this overall chapter. We shall, in principle, associate an actor with each part1. These actors will be described as behaviours. These behaviours evolve around a state. The state is the set of qualities, in particular the dynamic attributes, of the associated parts and/or any possible components or materials of the parts.

6.3.2 Discrete Actions
Deﬁnition: 70 Discrete Action: By a discrete action [366, Wilson and Shpall] we shall understand a foreseeable thing which deliberately and potentially changes a well-formed state, in one step, usually into another, still well-formed state, and for which an actor can be made responsible
An action is what happens when a function invocation changes, or potentially changes a state.

6.3.3 Discrete Events
Deﬁnition: 71 Event: By an event we shall understand some unforeseen thing, that is, some ‘notplanned-for’ “action”, one which surreptitiously, non-deterministically changes a well-formed state into another, but usually not a well-formed state, and for which no particular domain actor can be made responsible
Events can be characterised by a pair of (before and after) states, a predicate over these and, optionally, a time or time interval. We shall use the RSL concepts of clauses, i.e., expressions and statements to model actions. We shall use the CSP concepts of channels and channel communication, i.e., message output: ch[..]! e and message input: ch[..]? to model events. The notion of event continues to puzzle philosophers [141, 327, 285, 136, 192, 13, 114, 315, 113].

6.3.4 Discrete Behaviours
Deﬁnition: 72 Discrete Behaviour: By a discrete behaviour we shall understand a set of sequences of potentially interacting sets of discrete actions, events and behaviours
Discrete behaviours now become the focal point of our investigation. To every part we associate, by transcendental deduction, a behaviour. We shall express these behaviours as CSP processes [238]. For those behaviours we must therefore establish their means of communication via channels; their signatures; and their deﬁnitions – as translated from endurant parts.
Example 77 In Fig. 6.5 on Page 137 we “symbolically”, i.e., the “...”, show the following parts: each individual hub, each individual link, each individual bus company, each individual bus, and each individual automobile – and all of these.
1 This is an example of a transcendental deduction.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
130 6 DOMAINS – Towards a Dynamics Ontology: Perdurants
The idea is that those are the parts for which we shall deﬁne behaviours. That ﬁgure, however, and in contrast to Fig. 6.5 on Page 137, shows the composite parts as not containing their atomic parts, but as if they were “freestanding, atomic” parts. That shall visualise the transcendental interpretation as atomic part behaviours not being somehow embedded in composite behaviours, but operating concurrently, in parallel

6.3.5 Continuous Behaviours
By a continuous behaviour we shall understand a continuous time sequence of state changes. We shall not go into what may cause these state changes. And we shall not go into continuous behaviours in this monograph.

6.4 Modelling Concurrent Behaviours
We choose to exploit the CSP [238] subset of RSL since CSP is a suitable vehicle for expressing suitably abstract synchronisation and communication between behaviours. (In Sect. 6.4.2 on Page 132 we bring, as an informative aside, The Petri Net Story.) The mereology of domain parts induces channel declarations. CSP channels are loss-free. That is: two CSP processes, of which one offers and the other offers to accept a message do so synchronously and without forgetting that message. To model actual, so-called “real-life” communication via queues or allowing “channels” to forget, then you must model that explicitly in CSP. We refer to [238, 336, 340].

6.4.1 The CSP Story
CSP is a wonderful tool, i.e., a language with which to study and describe communicating sequential processes. It is the invention of Charles Anthony Richard Hoare. Major publications on CSP are [237, 239, 238, 336, 340].

6.4.1.1 Informal Presentation
CSP processes (models of domain behaviours) Pi,Pj,...,Pk can proceed in parallel:
Behaviours sometimes synchronise and usually communicate. Synchronisation and communication is abstracted as the sending (ch ! m) and receipt (ch ?) of messages, m:M, over channels, ch.
Communication between (unique identiﬁer) indexed behaviours have their channels modelled as similarly indexed channels:
out: ch[idx]!m in: ch[idx]? channel {ch[ide]:M|ide:IDE}
where IDE typically is some type expression over unique identiﬁer types. The expression
P i ⌈⌉P j ⌈⌉... ⌈⌉P k
can be understood as a choice: either P i, or P j, or ... or P k as non-deterministically internally chosen with no stipulation as to why ! The expression
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

6.4 Modelling Concurrent Behaviours 131
P i ⌈⌉⌊⌋P j ⌈⌉⌊⌋... ⌈⌉⌊⌋P k
can be understood as a choice: either P i, or P j, or ... or P k as deterministically externally chosen on the basis that the one chosen offers to participate in either an input, ch ?, or an output, ch ! msg, event. If more than one P i offers a communication then one is arbitrarily chosen. If no P i offers a communication the behaviour halts till some P j offers a communication.

6.4.1.2 A Syntax for CSP
We present the syntax for the CSP used in RSL.
P ::= stop | skip | P ∥P parallel composition (interleave) | P ⌈⌉P internal non-deterministic choice | P ⌈⌉⌊⌋P external non-deterministic choice | P ; P sequential composition | if B then P else P end Boolean conditional | let v = ch ? in ... end input value v on channel ch | ch ! e ; P output value of expression e on channel ch

6.4.1.3 Disciplined Uses of CSP
In connection with domain modelling, which uses of CSP appear to be meaningful? To understand our answer let us consider the following. As suggested in Chapters 3–4 the domain of endurants consists of a number of parts, some atomic, some compounded, that is, consisting of a part (a “root”) and a number of proper sub-parts (its “siblings”). With Chapter 5 we shall consider each and every part to also represent a behaviour, that is, with sub-parts representing behaviours not “embedded” in “root” part behaviours, but, in a “ﬁrst approximation” only bound to their roots by mutual mereologies. This is a modelling decision. We could have chosen a more elaborate one; one that, from the days of Algol 60 [257] was in line with the so-called ‘block structure’ concept. But have chosen not to !
Buses and Bus Companies
Example 78 We refer to Example ?? on Page ??. A bus company is like a “root” for its ﬂeet of “sibling” buses. But a bus company may cease to exist without the buses therefore necessarily also ceasing to exist. They may continue to operate, probably illegally, without, possibly. a valid bus driving certiﬁcate. Or they may be passed on to either private owners or to other bus companies. We use this example as a reason for not endowing a “block structure” concept on behaviours.
So there we are. With a collection of part and sub-part behaviours that need communicate “across” and “within” compounds. To do so they avail themselves of channels, ch[i,j], output, ch[i,j] ! e and input, ch[i,j] ?. The general situation is then that a number of behaviours, Pi and Q j, wishes to synchronise and communicate. The general, disciplined form for doing so can be schematically expressed as follows:
P(i,ujs,...)(...) ≡ ... ⊠{ ch[i,j] ! e ; ... | j:UI • j ∈... } ; ... ; P(i,ujs,...)(...)
Q(j,uis,...)(...) ≡ ... ⊠{ let v = ch[i,j] ? in ... end | i:UI • i ∈uis } ; ... Q(j,uis,...)(...)
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
132 6 DOMAINS – Towards a Dynamics Ontology: Perdurants
The ⊠operator is either ⌈⌉⌊⌋, or ⌈⌉, or ∥. We shall abstain from further ‘advice’ on the use of CSP but refer to either [39, Software Engineering 2, Chapter 21] (Concurrent Speciﬁcation Programming) or standard CSP textbooks [237, 239, 238, 336, 340]. We shall take up this line of inquiry in Sect. 6.7.10 on Page 148 –A Suggested Behaviour Deﬁnition 2 on Page 149.

6.4.2 The Petri Net Story
Petri nets2 are a wonderful concept ﬁrst invented by Carl Adam Petri [314]. It is intended to model a class of discrete event dynamic systems. A Petri net is a directed bipartite graph, in which some nodes (traditionally represented by bars) represent transitions (i.e. events) that may occur, and other nodes represent places (i.e. conditions, traditionally represented by circles). The directed arcs describe which places are pre- and/or post-conditions for which transitions (signiﬁed by arrows). We shall basically recommend the Petri net books by Wolfgang Reisig, some of which are [328, 329, 332, 333] – notably [333].

6.4.2.1 Informal Presentation
Let us start by focusing on the left Petri net. The meaning of the number of tokens in places, the transition input arc labels, and the transition output arc labels are as follows: If the respective transition input arc labels can be satisﬁed by the respective number of tokens in source places then a ﬁring can take place. After a ﬁring the Petri net has a new constellation.
The following (two-and-a-quarter pages)3 was written by Christian Krogh Madsen (around 2004)4
6.4.2.2 An Example – Christian Krogh Madsen
Critical Resource Sharing
2 The term Petri net stands for the ’language’ of Petri nets. A Petri net is an instance of the language of Petri nets 3 – an An Example and An RSL Model of Petri nets. 4 Christian Krogh Madsen devised and wrote Chapters 12–14: Petri Nets, Message and Live Sequence Charts, and Statecharts in [40, Pages 315–508].
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

6.4 Modelling Concurrent Behaviours 133
Example 79 Figure 6.2 shows an example PTN modelling four processes that access a common critical resource. One process writes to the resource, while the other three processes read from the resource. To ensure data integrity, mutual exclusion must be enforced between the writing process and the reading processes. The protocol for mutual exclusion requires a reading process to claim a key before it may read, while the writing process is required to claim three keys before it may write. A process that cannot get the required number of keys must wait until more keys become available. The place Keys holds a token for each key that is unused. When a process ﬁnishes reading or writing it returns the claimed keys to the place Keys and proceeds to do some processing that does not access the critical resource.
6.4.2.3 An RSL Model of Petri nets – Christian Krogh Madsen

6.4.2.3.1 Syntax of Petri nets
We ﬁrst formalise a syntax and then a static semantics for Petri nets, as PTN (for place-transition net), with ﬁnite capacity places.
A place transition net consists of a set of places with associated capacities, a set of transitions, a preset, a postset and a marking. Only well-formed PTNs will be considered. Places and transitions are further unspeciﬁed entities. Presets are a mapping from transitions to sets of pairs of places and weights. Postsets are a mapping from transitions to sets of pairs of places and weights. A marking is a mapping of places to marks. A mark is a non-negative integer.
type PTN = {| ptn:PTN′ • wf PTN(ptn) |} PTN′ = (Place→ m Nat) × Trans-set × Preset × Postset × Marking Place Trans Preset = Trans → m (Place × Nat)-set Postset = Trans → m (Place × Nat)-set Marking = Place → m Nat

6.4.2.3.2 A Static Semantics
A PTN is well-formed if:
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
134 6 DOMAINS – Towards a Dynamics Ontology: Perdurants
1-2 every transition in the set of transitions is included in the domain of the maps of presets and postsets, and 3 every place is in the pre- or postset of some transition, and 4 every transition has a non-empty preset or postset, and 5 no transition can have a preset or postset that includes the same place more than once with different weights, and 6 the marking covers all places, and 7 for every place the number of tokens assigned to it in the marking must be at most equal to the capacity of the place.
value wf PTN : PTN′ →Bool wf PTN(ps, ts, pres, posts, mark) ≡ [1] dom pres = ts ∧ [2] dom posts = ts ∧ [3] {p | p:Place • ∃pns: (Place×Nat)-set, n:Nat • (p,n) ∈pns∧pns ∈rng pres ∪rng posts} = dom ps ∧ [4] (∀t:Trans • t ∈ts ⇒pres(t) ∪posts(t) , {}) ∧ [5] (∀t:Trans • ∼(∃n1, n2 : Nat, p : Place • n1 , n2 ∧p ∈dom ps ∧ ({(p,n1), (p,n2)} ⊆pres(t) ∨ {(p,n1), (p,n2)} ⊆posts(t)))) ∧ [6] dom mark = dom ps ∧ [7] (∀p:Place • p ∈dom ps ⇒mark(p)≤ps(p))

6.4.2.3.3 A Dynamic Semantics
We formalise the dynamic aspects of PTN, namely what it means for a transition to be activated and for a transition to occur.
A transition is activated: if for every place in its preset there are at least as many tokens as the weight of the corresponding arrow, and if for every place in its postset the number of tokens at that place added to the weight of the corresponding arrow is at most equal to the capacity of the place. The occurrence of an activated transition produces a new marking in which the number of tokens at each of the places in the preset is reduced by the weight of the corresponding arrow, and in which the number of tokens at each of the places in the postset is increased by the weight of the corresponding arrow.
value activated: Trans×PTN ∼→Bool activated(t,ptn) ≡ let (ps,ts,pres,posts,mark) = ptn in (∀p:Place,n:Nat • (p,n) ∈pres(t) ⇒mark(p)≥n) ∧ (∀p:Place,n:Nat • (p,n) ∈posts(t) ⇒mark(p)+n≤ps(p)) end pre let (ps,ts,pres,posts,mark) = ptn in t ∈ts end
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41
136 6 DOMAINS – Towards a Dynamics Ontology: Perdurants
now with arrowed lines connecting the p part with the q parts. These lines are intended to show channels. We show them with two way arrows. We could instead have chosen one way arrows, in one or the other direction. The directions are intended to show a direction of value transfer. We have given the same channel names to all examples, ch PQ. We have ascribed channel message types MPQ to all channels.5 Figure6.4 shows an arrangement similar to that of Fig. 6.3 on the previous page, but for an m:n Constellation.
Behaviours and Channels
The channel declarations corresponding to Figs. 6.3 and 6.4 are:
channel [1] ch PQ[i,j]:MPQ [2] { ch PQ[i,x]:MPQ | x:{j,k,...,l} } [3] { ch PQ[p,q]:MPQ | p:{x,y,...,z}, q:{j,k,...,l} }
Since there is only one index i and j for channel [1], its declaration can be reduced. Similarly there is only one i for declaration [2]:
channel [1] ch PQ:MPQ [2] { ch PQ[x]:MPQ | x:{j,k,...,l} }

251 The following description identities holds:
251 { ch PQ[x]:MPQ | x:{j,k,...,l} } ≡ch PQ[j],ch PQ[k],...,ch PQ[l],
251 { ch PQ[p,q]:MPQ | p:{x,y,...,z}, q:{j,k,...,l} } ≡ 251 ch PQ[x,j],ch PQ[x,k],...,ch PQ[x,l], 251 ch PQ[y,j],ch PQ[y,k],...,ch PQ[y,l], 251 ..., 251 ch PQ[z,j],ch PQ[z,k],...,ch PQ[z,l]
We can sketch a diagram similar to Figs. 6.3 on the preceding page and 6.4 for the case of composite parts.

6.5.2 Channel Declarations
We can simplify the general treatment of channel declarations. Basically all we can say, for any domain, is that any two distinct part behaviours may need to communicate. Therefore we declare a vector of channels indexed by sets of two distinct part identiﬁers.
channel { ch[{ij,ik}] | ij,ik:UI • {ij,ik}⊆all uniq ids() ∧ij,ik } M
5 Of course, these names and types would have to be distinct for any one domain description.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

6.5 Channels and Communication 137
Initially we shall leave the type of messages over channels further undeﬁned. As we, laboriously, work through the deﬁnition of behaviours, Sect. 6.7, we shall be able to make M precise. all uniq ids was deﬁned in Sect. 4.2.4 on Page 87. In preparation for the next example we show Figure 6.5. In that example we shall however reﬁne the channel declaration indices to two element sets of unique identiﬁers from speciﬁc part identiﬁer types.
We ascribe types to the messages offered on channels.
252 Hubs and links communicate, both ways, with one another, over channels, hl ch, whose indexes are determined by their mereologies. 253 Hubs send one kind of messages, links another. 254 Bus companies offer timed bus time tables to buses, one way. 255 Buses and automobiles offer their current, timed positions to the road element, hub or link they are on, one way.
type 253 H L Msg, L H Msg 252 HL Msg = H L Msg | L F Msg 254 BC B Msg = T × BusTimTbl 255 V R Msg = T × (BPos|APos)

256 This justiﬁes the channel declaration which is calculated to be:
channel 256 { hl ch[h ui,l ui]:H L Msg 256 | h ui:H UI,l ui:L UI•i ∈huis∧j ∈lhuim(h ui) } 256 256 { hl ch[h ui,l ui]:L H Msg 256 | h ui:H UI,l ui:L UI•l ui ∈luis∧i ∈lhuim(l ui) }
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
138 6 DOMAINS – Towards a Dynamics Ontology: Perdurants
We shall argue for bus company-to-bus channels based on the mereologies of those parts. Bus companies need communicate to all its buses, but not the buses of other bus companies. Buses of a bus company need communicate to their bus company, but not to other bus companies.

257 This justiﬁes the channel declaration which is calculated to be:
channel 257 { bc b ch[bc ui,b ui] | bc ui:BC UI, b ui:B UI 257 • bc ui ∈bcuis ∧b ui ∈buis }: BC B Msg
We shall argue for vehicle to road element channels based on the mereologies of those parts. Buses and automobiles need communicate to all hubs and all links.

258 This justiﬁes the channel declaration which is calculated to be:
channel 258 { v r ch[v ui,r ui] | v ui:V UI,r ui:R UI 258 • v ui∈vuis∧r ui∈ruis }: V R Msg
The channel calculations are described on Pages 141–142
6.6 Signatures – In General
We shall treat perdurants as function invocations. In our cursory overview of perdurants we shall now focus on one perdurant quality: function signatures. Deﬁnition: 73 Function Signature: By a function signature we shall understand a function name and a function type expression
Deﬁnition: 74 Function Type Expression: By a function type expression we shall understand a pair of type expressions. separated by a function type constructor either →(for total function) or ∼→ (for partial function)
The type expressions are part sort or type, or material sort or type, or attribute type names, but may, occasionally be expressions over respective type names involving -set, ×, ∗, → m and | type constructors.

6.6.1 Action Signatures and Deﬁnitions
Actors usually provide their initiated actions with arguments, say of type VAL. Hence the schematic function (action) signature and schematic deﬁnition:
action: VAL →Σ ∼→Σ action(v)(σ) as σ′
expresses that a selection of the domain state, as designated by the Σ type expression, is acted upon and possibly changed. The partial function type operator ∼→shall indicate that action(v)(σ) may not be deﬁned for the argument, i.e., initial state σ and/or the argument v:VAL, hence the precondition P(v,σ). The post condition Q(v,σ,σ′) characterises the “after” state, σ′:Σ, with respect to the “before” state, σ:Σ, and possible arguments (v:VAL). Which could be the argument values, v:VAL, of actions ? Well, there can basically be only the following kinds of argument values: parts, components and materials, respectively unique part identiﬁers, mereologies and attribute values.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41
6.6 Signatures – In General 139
Perdurant (action) analysis thus proceeds as follows: identifying relevant actions, assigning names to these, delineating the “smallest” relevant state6, ascribing signatures to action functions, and determining action pre-conditions and action post-conditions. Of these, ascribing signatures is the most crucial: In the process of determining the action signature one oftentimes discovers that part or component or material attributes have been left (“so far”) “undiscovered”.

6.6.2 Event Signatures and Deﬁnitions:
Events are usually characterised by the absence of known actors and the absence of explicit “external” arguments. Hence the schematic function (event) signature:
value event: Σ × Σ ∼→Bool event(σ,σ′) as tf pre: P(σ) post: tf = Q(σ,σ′)
The event signature expresses that a selection of the domain as designated by the Σ type expression is “acted” upon, by unknown actors, and possibly changed. The partial function type operator ∼→shall indicate that event(σ,σ′) may not be deﬁned for some states σ. The resulting state may, or may not, satisfy axioms and well-formedness conditions over Σ – as expressed by the post condition Q(σ,σ′). Events may thus cause well-formedness of states to fail. Subsequent actions, once actors discover such “disturbing events”, are therefore expected to remedy that situation, that is, to restore well-formedness. We shall not illustrate this point.

6.6.3 Behaviour Signatures
We shall only cover behaviour signatures when expressed in RSL/CSP [176]. The behaviour functions are now called processes. That a behaviour function is a never-ending function, i.e., a process, is “revealed” by the “trailing” Unit:
behaviour: ... →... Unit
That a process takes no argument is ”revealed” by a “leading” Unit:
That a process accepts channel, viz.: ch, inputs, is “revealed” as follows:
behaviour: ... →in ch ...
That a process offers channel, viz.: ch, outputs is “revealed” as follows:
behaviour: ... →out ch ...
That a process accepts other arguments is “revealed” as follows:
where ARG can be any type expression:
T, T→T, T→T→T, et cetera
where T is any type expression.
6 By “smallest” we mean: containing the fewest number of parts. Experience shows that the domain analyser cum describer should strive for identifying the smallest state.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
140 6 DOMAINS – Towards a Dynamics Ontology: Perdurants
6.6.4 Attribute Access, An Interpretation
We shall only be concerned with part attributes. And we shall here consider them in the context of part behaviours. Part behaviour deﬁnitions embody part attributes.
Static attributes designate constants. As such they can be “compiled” into behaviour deﬁnitions. We choose, thus, to bring static attribute values as explicit behaviour arguments. Monitorable-only attributes designate time-varying values whose values we choose to access in the following manner: attr A(p) where p is a part in the global state, cf. Sect. 3.18 on Page 73. Biddable attributes designate time-varying values whose values we choose to access, respectively biddably update in the following manner: attr A(p) update(attr A,A,p) where p is a part in the global state. We shall informally explain the update functional below. Programmable attribute values are calculated by their behaviours. We list them as behaviour arguments. The behaviour deﬁnitions may then specify new values. These are provided in the position of the programmable attribute arguments in tail recursive invocations of these behaviours.

6.6.4.1 The update Functional
The generic update function is explained very informally:
[1] update: (P→A) × A × P →P [2] update(attr A,a,p) ≡p′
[3] pre A ∈analyse attributes(p) ∧parts[uid P(p)] is declared ∧... [4] post attr A(p′) ≈a ∧...
[1] The ﬁrst argument is the observe attribute function, the second argument is the attribute value, the third argument is the part, p, being updated. [2] The result of applying the update function is a part, p′. [3] The pre-condition is that the attribute type, A, is amongst the attributes of the part, that part p is in the global state, i.e., has been declared as a variable, and more! [4] The post-condition is that the updated attribute of p′ approximates the argument attribute value, and “much, much more”.
The “much, much more” refers to the following: the unique identiﬁer of p′ is that of p; the mereology of p′ is that of p; all other attribute values of p′ is are those of p; and no other part has changed values. The above amounts to a “storage model”, i.e., a model of domain state variables akin to the storage models put forward ﬁrst in [26, Bekiˇc and Walk, 1971], see also [22, Bekiˇc, Bjørner, Henhapl, Jones and Lucas, 1974], then in [40, Sect. 8.7.1, Bjørner, 2006]. In the context of domain models we shall (later) introduced an array, parts, of variables global to an entire domain description. For each physical part, p, with unique identiﬁer, π, there will be a corresponding array element: parts[π]. To obtain a monitorable attribute A value for part p
is thus expressed as attr A(parts[π]).
To update a monitorable attribute A to value a:A for part p
is correspondingly expressed as update(attr A,a,parts[π]).
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41
6.6 Signatures – In General 141
6.6.4.2 Calculating In/Output Channel Signatures:
259 The function calc i o chn refs apply to parts and yield RSL-Text. a From p we calculate its unique identiﬁer value and its mereology value. b If the mereology is not void then a (Currying7) right pointing arrow, →, is inserted.8
c If there is an input mereology then the keyword in is inserted in front of the input mereology; d similarly for the input/output mereology; e and for the output mereology.
value 259 calc i o chn refs: P →RSL-Text 259 calc i o chn refs(p) ≡; 259a let ui = uid P(p), (ics,iocs,ocs) = obs mereo (p) in 259b if ics ∪iocs ∪ocs ∪atrvs , {} then ❝→❞end ; 259c if ics ,{} then ❝in ❞calc chn refs(ui,ichs) end ; 259d if iocs,{} then ❝in,out ❞calc chn refs(ui,iochs) end ; 259e if ocs,{} then ❝out ❞calc chn refs(ui,ochs) end end
260 The function calc chn refs a apply to a pair, (ui,uis) of a unique part identiﬁer type name and a set of unique part identiﬁer type names and yield RSL-Text. b If uis is empty no text is generated. Otherwise an array channel declaration is generated.
260a calc chn refs: P UI × Q UI-set →RSL-Text 260b calc chn refs(pui,quis) ≡ 260b { ❝(pui,qui) ch[pui,qui] ❞| qui:Q UI•qui ∈quis }
261 The function calc all chn dcls a apply to a pair, (pui,quis) of a unique part identiﬁer and a set of unique part identiﬁers and yield RSL-Text. b If quis is empty no text is generated. Otherwise an array channel declaration { ≪| η(pui,qui) ch[pui,qui]:η(pui,qui)M ≫| | qui:Q UI•qui ∈quis } is generated.
261a calc all chn dcls: P UI × Q UI-set →RSL-Text 261a calc all chn dcls(pui,quis) ≡ 261a { ❝(pui,qui) ch[pui,qui]:M ❞| qui:Q UI•qui ∈quis }
The ❝(pui,qui) ❞invocation serves to name both the channel, ❝(pui,qui) ch[pui,qui] ❞, and the channel message type, ❝M ❞. That message type has, possibly, to be left open, at this stage of analysis & description. Message types can perhaps best, i.e., easiest be decided upon once all the behaviour body deﬁnitions have been completed.
262 The overloaded distributed-ﬁx operator ❝❞9 is here applied to a pair of unique identiﬁers. Very informally:
262 ❝... ❞: (UI →RSL-Text)|((X UI×Y UI) →RSL-Text) 262 ❝(x ui,y ui)❞≡(❝(x ui,y ui ❞))
Repeating these channel calculations over distinct parts p1,p2,...,pn of the same part type P will yield “similar” behaviour signature channel references:
7 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Currying 8 We refer to the three parts of the mereology value as the input, the input/output and the output mereology (values). 9 The η operator applies to a type and yields the name of the type.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
142 6 DOMAINS – Towards a Dynamics Ontology: Perdurants
{PQ ch[p1ui,qui]|p1ui:P UI,qui:Q UI•qui ∈quis} {PQ ch[p2ui,qui]|p2ui:P UI,qui:Q UI•qui ∈quis} ... {PQ ch[pnui,qui]|pnui:P UI,qui:Q UI•qui ∈quis}
These distinct single channel references can be assembled into one:
{ PQ ch[pui,qui] | pui:P UI,qui:Q UI : −pui ∈puis,qui ∈quis } where puis = { p1ui,p2ui,...,pnui}
As an example we have already calculated the array channels for Fig. 6.4 Pg. 136 – cf. the left, the Parts, of that ﬁgure – cf. Items [1–3] Pages 136–136. The identities Item 251 Pg. 136 apply.

6.7 Behaviour Signatures and Deﬁnitions
In this section we shall ﬁnally show the schemas whereby discrete endurants are transcendentally “morphed” into behaviours.

6.7.1 General on Behaviour Schemas
The general translation schema can be expressed as follows:
Translation Schema 2
BehaviourEndurant: E →RSL-Text BehaviourEndurant(e) ≡
is physical part(e) → 3 Pg. 143 is atomic(e) →BehaviourAtomic(e), 4 Pg. 144 is composite(e) →BehaviourComposite(e), 5 Pg. 144 is single sort set(e) →BehaviourSingleSortSet(e), 6 Pg. 145 is alternative sorts set(e) →BehaviourAlternativeSortsSet(e), 7 Pg. 145 is structure(e) →BehaviourStructure(e) 8 Pg. 145 is conjoin(e) →BehaviourCon join(e), is living species(e) →..., [ we omit treatment of living species ]
We have chosen to not “morph” materials into behaviours – as expressed by the last clause above.

6.7.1.1 The General Behaviour Signature
We associate with each part, p:P, a behaviour name M P. That is, every part p of sort P is associated with the same behaviour name M P each individual such behaviour being distinguished by the initial unique identiﬁer constant argument. Behaviours thus have as their ﬁrst argument their unique part identiﬁer: uid P(p). Behaviours evolves around a state, or, rather, a set of values: its possibly changing mereology, mt:MT and the attributes of the part.10 A behaviour signature is therefore:
M P: ui:UI×me:MT×stat attr types(p) →prgr attr types(p) →calc i o chn refs(p) Unit
10 We presently leave out consideration of possible components and materials of the part.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

6.7 Behaviour Signatures and Deﬁnitions 143
where (i) ui:UI is the unique identiﬁer value and type of part p; (ii) me:MT is the value and type mereology of part p, me = mereo P(p); (iii) stat attr types(p): static attribute types of part p:P; (iv) prgr attr types(p): controllable attribute types of part p:P; (v) calc i o chn refs(p) calculates references to the input, the input/output and the output channels serving the attributes shared between part p and the parts designated in its mereology me.

6.7.2 Preamble Deﬁnitions
We have, in Chapter4 and in this chapter, deﬁned a number of analysis predicates, analysis functions, and perdurant calculators. These will be used in the preamble of all the part BehaviourSchemas of this section. We summarise some relevant functions and perdurant calculators.
prgr attr types, Item 202, 102 prgr attr vals, Item 206, 103
calc all chn dcls, Item 261a, 141 calc chn refs, Item 260a, 141 calc i o chn refs, Item 259, 141
declaring all monitorable variables, Item 247, 128
stat attr types, Item 200, 102 stat attr vals, Item 204, 103
moni attr types, Item 201, 102 moni attr vals, Item 204, 103
Translate Endurant, 142
Each BehaviourSchema requires more-or-less all of the below:
263 UI, unique identiﬁer type;
264 MT, mereology type; 265 ST, static attribute types;
266 PT, programmable attribute types; 267 IOR, input/output channel references.
value, 263. UI = type of(uid E(e)) 264. MT = type of(mereo E(e)) 265. ST = stat attr types(e), 266. PT = prgr attr types(e), 267. IOR = calc i o chn refs(e)

6.7.3 A Behaviour Signature Calculator
For each endurant to be Behaviourd we need collect the elements, values and types that are relevant to that endurant’s behaviour signature.
collect signature: E →❝UI ❞×❝MT ❞×❝ST ❞×❝PT ❞×❝IOR ❞ collect signature(e) ≡ (type of(uid E(e)),type of(mereo E(e)), stat attr types(e),prgr attr types(e), calc i o chn refs(e))
So we assume this clause to be part of each e:E schema, ..., below:
value let (❝UI,MT,ST,PT,IOR ❞) = collect signature(e) in ... end
The Behaviour schemas that now follow make use of analyse part materials part and analyse part materials materials endurant analysis function prompts deﬁned in Sect. 3.15 on Page 63.

6.7.4 Atomic Schema
Let p:P be an atomic part. It “translates” into behaviour MP:
Translation Schema 3
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
144 6 DOMAINS – Towards a Dynamics Ontology: Perdurants
BehaviourAtomic(e) ≡
MP: UI×MT×ST →PT →IOR Unit MP(ui,me,sv)(pv) ≡BP(ui,me,sv)(pv) ❞
The signature identiﬁers UI, MT, ST and PT are taken from the collect signature function. They are always understood syntactically when “occurring” in, e.g., signatures. Expression BP(ui,me,sv)(pv) stands for the behaviour deﬁnition body in which the names ui, me, sv, pv are chosen, freely by the domain describer and bound to the behaviour deﬁnition head, i.e., the left hand side of the ≡. That expression, BP(ui,me,sv)(pv), may thus stand for quite a complex RSL/CSP clause. We elaborate on that in Sect. 6.7.10.

6.7.5 Composite Schema
Let P be a composite sort deﬁned in terms of endurant sub-sorts E1, E2, . . . , En. Here we only need be concerned with the translation of p:P, translation of “siblings” follows from the sub-sort endurants e1, e2, . . . , en which have been set aside. The behaviour description translated from p:P, is thus a behaviour description of the “root”, M P, relying on and handling the unique identiﬁer, mereology and attributes of part p
Translation Schema 4
BehaviourComposite: E →RSL-Text BehaviourComposite(e) ≡ ❝value
M E: UI × MT × ST →PT →IOR Unit M E(ui,me,sv)(pv) ≡BE(ui,me,sv)(pv) ❞
Modelling Choice 10 Composites: The above schema mandates that the conjoin behaviour, M E, be deﬁned. It does not say anything about the subsidiary elements of the composite. They are handled by the analyse and describe perdurant process, Sect. 6.12 on Page 158. Why do we express the above? We do so because the schemas are just suggestions ! The domain analyser & describer method mandates that all observed parts be described.

6.7.6 Single Sort Set Schema
is single sort set(e)
Translation Schema 5
BehaviourSingleSortSet: E →RSL-Text BehaviourSingleSortSet(e) ≡ ❝value
M E: UI × MT × ST →PT →IOR Unit M E(ui,me,sv)(pv) ≡BE(ui,me,sv)(pv) ❞
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

6.7 Behaviour Signatures and Deﬁnitions 145

6.7.7 Alternative Sorts Set Schema
is alternative sorts set(e)
Translation Schema 6
BehaviourAlternativeSortsSet: E →RSL-Text BehaviourAlternativeSortsSet(e) ≡ ❝value
M E: UI × MT × ST →PT →IOR Unit M E(ui,me,sv)(pv) ≡BE(ui,me,sv)(pv) ❞

6.7.8 Structure Schema
Translation Schema 7
BehaviourStructure: E →RSL-Text BehaviourStructure(e) ≡❝❞

6.7.9 Conjoin Schemas
Translation Schema 8
BehaviourCon join: E →RSL-Text BehaviourCon join(e) ≡
is part materials conjoin(e) →BehaviourPart Materials Con join(e), is material parts conjoin(e) →BehaviourMaterial Parts Con join(e), is part parts conjoin(e) →BehaviourPart Parts Con join(e)

6.7.9.1 The Part-Materials Conjoin Schema
The Part-Materials Conjoin Schema reveal more of the “semantics” of conjoins. A part-materials conjoin gives rise to one behaviour: the conjoin behaviour, MC, with the additional programmable-like argument of the conjoin material. That is, in this monograph, we shall treat materials as “passive”, i.e., not having a behaviour that we deﬁne separately from that of MC.
is part materials conjoin(e)
Translation Schema 9
let ( ,(M1,...,Mm)) = analyse part materials materials(e) in value
BehaviourPart Materials Con join(e) ≡
MC: UI×MT×ST →PT×(M1×...×Mm) →IOR Unit MC(ui,me,sv)(pv,cm) ≡BP(ui,me,sv)(pv,cm) ❞ end
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
146 6 DOMAINS – Towards a Dynamics Ontology: Perdurants

6.7.9.2 The Material-Parts Conjoin Schema
The Material-Parts Conjoin Schema reveals more of the “semantics” of conjoins. A material-parts conjoin gives rise to one behaviour: the conjoin “root” behaviour, MC. The behaviour of the “sibling” part behaviours is deﬁned separately – as is expressed by the analyse and describe perdurant process of Sect. 6.12 on Page 158. The former, MC, “keeps track” of the material compound, cm, relating the contained materials to the atomic ”root” part. The “sibling” behaviours proceed at their own will.
is material parts conjoin(e)
Translation Schema 10
let ( ,CM) = analyse material parts material(e) in value
BehaviourMaterial Parts Con join(e) ≡
MC: UI×MT×ST →PT×CM IOR Unit MC(ui,me,sv)(pv,cm) ≡BP(ui,me,sv)(pv,cm) ❞ end
Modelling Choice 11 Material-Parts: The analyse and describe perdurant process, cf. Sect. 6.12 on Page 158 does prescribe the schema for some arbitrarily chosen part in ps, that is, mandates that all be described – and that is why we are mentioning it here.
A Conjoin Canal Lock
Example 81 Let p be a conjoin canal lock with atom part a and material m. Then m is the water, a natural material, in the conjoin, housed in the ﬁxed chamber of p. and a is the lock mechanics: two gates that can open and close, letting water in and out of the lock, a paddle, i.e., a valve by means of which water is ﬁlled or emptied, a winding gear, the mechanism which allows paddles to be lifted (opened) or lowered (closed). et cetera. The MC behaviour, i.e., the overall behaviour of the canal lock, when it so decides11inform the M A behaviour to operate its mechanics; it does so based on either sampling its container, m, water level, say by means of an dynamic attribute attr Level(m), or receiving appropriate messages from the M A behaviour. The M A behaviour, i.e., the lock mechanics, in a sense, is oblivious to the water (and the vessels), and keeps itself occupied by monitoring and controlling its various mechanisms: the gates, paddles, winding gear, et cetera.

6.7.9.3 The Part-Parts Conjoin Schema
The Part-Parts Conjoin Schema reveals more of the “semantics” of conjoins. A part-parts conjoin gives rise to one behaviour: the conjoin’s “root” part behaviour, MC. MC may be expected to “keep track” of the “sibling” parts, ps – the contained parts to the conjoin part – behaviours.
is part parts conjoin(e)
Translation Schema 11
BehaviourPart Parts Con join(e) ≡
MC: UI×MT×ST →PT →IOR Unit MC(ui,me,sv)(pv) ≡BP(ui,me,sv)(pv) ❞
11 We do not model the vessels that travels the canals and enter and leave locks.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

6.7 Behaviour Signatures and Deﬁnitions 147
The next example focuses only on signatures.
Road Transport Behaviour Signatures
Example 82 We ﬁrst decide on names of behaviours. In the translation schemas we gave schematic names to behaviours of the form M P. We now assign mnemonic names: from part names to names of transcendentally interpreted behaviours and then we assign signatures to these behaviours.
a there is the usual “triplet” of arguments: unique identiﬁer, mereology and static attributes; b then there are the programmable attributes;
c and ﬁnally there are the input/output channel references: ﬁrst those allowing communication between hub and link behaviours, d and then those allowing communication between hub and vehicle (bus and automobile) behaviours.
value 268 hubhui: 268a h ui:H UI×(vuis,luis, ):H Mer×HΩ 268b →(HΣ×H Trafﬁc) 268c →in,out { h l ch[h ui,l ui] | l ui:L UI•l ui ∈luis } 268d { ba r ch[h ui,v ui] | v ui:V UI•v ui∈vuis } Unit 268a pre: vuis = vuis ∧luis = luis
a there is the usual “triplet” of arguments: unique identiﬁer, mereology and static attributes; b then there are the programmable attributes;
c and ﬁnally there are the input/output channel references: ﬁrst those allowing communication between hub and link behaviours, d and then those allowing communication between link and vehicle (bus and automobile) behaviours.
value 269 linklui: 269a l ui:L UI×(vuis,huis, ):L Mer×LΩ 269b →(LΣ×L Trafﬁc) 269c →in,out { h l ch[h ui,l ui] | h ui:H UI:h ui ∈huis } 269d { ba r ch[l ui,v ui] | v ui:(B UI|A UI)•v ui∈vuis } Unit 269a pre: vuis = vuis ∧huis = huis
a there is here just a “doublet” of arguments: unique identiﬁer and mereology; b then there is the one programmable attribute;
c and ﬁnally there are the input/output channel references allowing communication between the bus company and buses.
value 270 bus companybcui: 270a bc ui:BC UI×( , ,buis):BC Mer 270b →BusTimTbl 270c in,out {bc b ch[bc ui,b ui]|b ui:B UI•b ui∈buis} Unit 270a pre: buis = buis ∧huis = huis
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
148 6 DOMAINS – Towards a Dynamics Ontology: Perdurants
a there is here just a “doublet” of arguments: unique identiﬁer and mereology; b then there are the programmable attributes;
c and ﬁnally there are the input/output channel references: ﬁrst the input/output allowing communication between the bus company and buses, d and the input/output allowing communication between the bus and the hub and link behaviours.
value 271 busbui: 271a b ui:B UI×(bc ui, ,ruis):B Mer 271b →(LN × BTT × BPOS) 271c →out bc b ch[bc ui,b ui], 271d {ba r ch[r ui,b ui]|r ui:(H UI|L UI)•ui∈vuis} Unit 271a pre: ruis = ruis ∧bc ui ∈bcuis
a there is the usual “triplet” of arguments: unique identiﬁer, mereology and static attributes; b then there is the one programmable attribute;
c and ﬁnally there are the input/output channel references allowing communication between the automobile and the hub and link behaviours.
value 272 automobileaui: 272a a ui:A UI×( , ,ruis):A Mer×rn:RegNo 272b →apos:APos 272c in,out {ba r ch[a ui,r ui]|r ui:(H UI|L UI)•r ui∈ruis} Unit 272a pre: ruis = ruis ∧a ui ∈auis

6.7.10 Core Behaviour
The core processes can be understood as never ending, “tail recursively deﬁned” processes:
Core Behaviour Part e (I)
A Suggested Behaviour Deﬁnition 1
FP: UI×MT×ST →PT→IOT →MT×PT
We present a rough sketch of Fπ. The Fπ action non-deterministically internal choice chooses between
either [1,2,3,4] [1] accepting input from [4] a suitable (“offering”) part process, [2] optionally offering a reply, and [3] ﬁnally delivering an updated state; or [5,6,7,8] [5] ﬁnding a suitable “order” (val) [8] to a suitable (“inquiring”) behaviour (π′), [6] offering that value (on channel ch[π′] [7] and then delivering an updated state; or [9] doing own work resulting in an updated state.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

6.7 Behaviour Signatures and Deﬁnitions 149
Core Behaviour Part e (II)
A Suggested Behaviour Deﬁnition 2
in reply: VAL →ST →MT×ST →→PT →IOR →VAL in update: VAL →MT×ST →PT →IOR × (MT×PT) await reply: UI →MT×ST →PT →IOR →VAL out update: VAL →MT×ST →PT →IOR →MT×PT own work: SA →MT×PT →IOR →MT×PT
We leave these auxiliary functions and VAL undeﬁned.
The in reply, in update, await reply, out update and own work functions contain references to static and programmable attributes values by stating their names: sv and pv; and to monitorable attribute, Am, values by stating attr A(part[ui]). Updates. v, to biddable attributes, Ab, are expressed as update(A,v,part[ui]).
Automobile Behaviour
Example 83 We deﬁne the behaviours in a different order than the treatment of their signatures. We “split” deﬁnition of the automobile behaviour into the behaviour of automobiles when positioned at a hub, and into the behaviour automobiles when positioned at on a link. In both cases the behaviours include the “idling” of the automobile, i.e., its “not moving”, standing still.
273 We abstract automobile behaviour at a Hub (hui). 274 The vehicle remains at that hub, “idling”, 275 informing the hub behaviour, 276 or, internally non-deterministically,
a moves onto a link, tli, whose “next” hub, identiﬁed by th ui, is obtained from the mereology of the link identiﬁed by tl ui; b informs the hub it is leaving and the link it is entering of its initial link position,
c whereupon the vehicle resumes the vehicle behaviour positioned at the very beginning (0) of that link, 277 or, again internally non-deterministically, 278 the vehicle “disappears — off the radar” !
273 automobileaui(a ui,({},(ruis,vuis),{}),rn) 273 (apos:atH(ﬂui,h ui,tl ui)) ≡ 274 (ba r ch[a ui,h ui] ! (record TIME(),atH(ﬂui,h ui,tl ui)); 275 automobileaui(a ui,({},(ruis,vuis),{}),rn)(apos)) 276 276a (let ({fh ui,th ui},ruis′)=mereo L(℘(tl ui)) in 276a assert: fh ui=h ui ∧ruis=ruis′
273 let onl = (tl ui,h ui,0,th ui) in 276b (ba r ch[a ui,h ui] ! (record TIME(),onL(onl)) ∥ 276b ba r ch[a ui,tl ui] ! (record TIME(),onL(onl))) ;
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
150 6 DOMAINS – Towards a Dynamics Ontology: Perdurants
276c automobileaui(a ui,({},(ruis,vuis),{}),rn) 276c (onL(onl)) end end) 277 278 stop
You may skip Example 84 in a ﬁrst reading.
Further Behaviours of a Road Transport System
279 We abstract automobile behaviour on a Link.
a Internally non-deterministically, either
i the automobile remains, “idling”, i.e., not moving, on the link, ii however, ﬁrst informing the link of its position, b or
i if if the automobile’s position on the link has not yet reached the hub, then
1 then the automobile moves an arbitrary small, positive Real-valued increment along the link 2 informing the hub of this, 3 while resuming being an automobile ate the new position, or ii else,
1 while obtaining a “next link” from the mereology of the hub (where that next link could very well be the same as the link the vehicle is about to leave), 2 the vehicle informs both the link and the imminent hub that it is now at that hub, identiﬁed by th ui, 3 whereupon the vehicle resumes the vehicle behaviour positioned at that hub; c or d the vehicle “disappears — off the radar” !
279 automobileaui(a ui,({},ruis,{}),rno) 279 (vp:onL(fh ui,l ui,f,th ui)) ≡ 279(a)ii (ba r ch[thui,aui]!atH(lui,thui,nxt lui) ; 279(a)i automobileaui(a ui,({},ruis,{}),rno)(vp)) 279b 279(b)i (if not yet at hub(f) 279(b)i then 279(b)i1 (let incr = increment(f) in 273 let onl = (tl ui,h ui,incr,th ui) in 279(b)i2 ba−r ch[l ui,a ui] ! onL(onl) ; 279(b)i3 automobileaui(a ui,({},ruis,{}),rno) 279(b)i3 (onL(onl)) 279(b)i end end) 279(b)ii else 279(b)ii1 (let nxt lui:L UI•nxt lui ∈mereo H(℘(th ui)) in 279(b)ii2 ba r ch[thui,aui]!atH(l ui,th ui,nxt lui) ; 279(b)ii3 automobileaui(a ui,({},ruis,{}),rno) 279(b)ii3 (atH(l ui,th ui,nxt lui)) end) 279(b)i end) 279c 279d stop 279(b)i1 increment: Fract →Fract

280 The hub behaviour
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

6.7 Behaviour Signatures and Deﬁnitions 151
a non-deterministically, externally offers b to accept timed vehicle positions —
c which will be at the hub, from some vehicle, v ui. d The timed vehicle hub position is appended to the front of that vehicle’s entry in the hub’s trafﬁc table;
e whereupon the hub proceeds as a hub behaviour with the updated hub trafﬁc table.
f The hub behaviour offers to accept from any vehicle. g A post condition expresses what is really a proof obligation: that the hub trafﬁc, ht′ satisﬁes the axiom of the endurant hub trafﬁc attribute Item 187 Pg. 99.
281 The link behaviour non-deterministically, externally offers 282 to accept timed vehicle positions — 283 which will be on the link, from some vehicle, v ui. 284 The timed vehicle link position is appended to the front of that vehicle’s entry in the link’s trafﬁc table; 285 whereupon the link proceeds as a link behaviour with the updated link trafﬁc table. 286 The link behaviour offers to accept from any vehicle. 287 A post condition expresses what is really a proof obligation: that the link trafﬁc, lt′ satisﬁes the axiom of the endurant link trafﬁc attribute Item 191 Pg. 100.
We model bus companies very rudimentary. Bus companies keep a ﬂeet of buses. Bus companies create, maintain, distribute bus time tables. Bus companies deploy their buses to honor obligations of their bus time tables. We shall basically only model the distribution of bus time tables to buses. We shall not cover other aspects of bus company management, etc.
288 Bus companies non-deterministically, internally, chooses among
a updating their bus time tables b whereupon they resume being bus companies, albeit with a new bus time table; 289 “interleaved” with
a offering the current time-stamped bus time table to buses which offer willingness to received them b whereupon they resume being bus companies with unchanged bus time table.
270 bus companybcui(bcui,( ,buis, ))(btt) ≡ 288a (let btt′ = update(btt,...) in 288b bus companybcui(bcui,( ,buis, ))(btt′) end ) 289 289a ( ⌈⌉⌊⌋{bc b ch[bc ui,b ui] ! btt | b ui:B UI•b ui∈buis 289b bus companybcui(bcui,( ,buis, ))(record TIME(),btt) } )
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
152 6 DOMAINS – Towards a Dynamics Ontology: Perdurants
We model the interface between buses and their owning companies — as well as the interface between buses and the road net, the latter by almost “carbon-copying” all elements of the automobile behaviour(s).

290 The bus behaviour chooses to either
a accept a (latest) time-stamped buss time table from its bus company – b where after it resumes being the bus behaviour now with the updated bus time table. 291 or, non-deterministically, internally,
a based on the bus position
i if it is at a hub then it behaves as prescribed in the case of automobiles at a hub, ii else, it is on a link, and then it behaves as prescribed in the case of automobiles on a link.
290 busbui(b ui,( ,(bc ui,ruis), ))(ln,btt,bpos) ≡ 290a (let btt′ = b bc ch[b ui,bc ui] ? in 290b busbui(b ui,({},(bc ui,ruis),{}))(ln,btt′,bpos) end) 291 291a (case bpos of 291(a)i atH(ﬂui,h ui,tl ui) → 291(a)i atH busbui(b ui,( ,(bc ui,ruis), ))(ln,btt,bpos), 291(a)ii aonL(fh ui,l ui,f,th ui) → 291(a)ii onL busbui(b ui,( ,(bc ui,ruis), ))(ln,btt,bpos) 291a end)
The atH busbui behaviour deﬁnition is a simple transcription of the automobileaui (atH) behaviour deﬁnition: mereology expressions being changed from to , programmed attributes being changed from atH(ﬂui,h ui,tl ui) to (ln,btt,atH(ﬂui,h ui,tl ui)), channel references a ui being replaced by b ui, and behaviour invocations renamed from automobileaui to busbui. So formula lines 274–279d below presents “nothing new” !
291(a)i atH busbui(b ui,( ,(bc ui,ruis), )) 291(a)i (ln,btt,atH(ﬂui,h ui,tl ui)) ≡ 274 (ba r ch[b ui,h ui] ! (record TIME(),atH(ﬂui,h ui,tl ui)); 275 busbui(b ui,({},(bc ui,ruis),{}))(ln,btt,bpos)) 290a 276a (let ({fh ui,th ui},ruis′)=mereo L(℘(tl ui)) in 276a assert: fh ui=h ui ∧ruis=ruis′
273 let onl = (tl ui,h ui,0,th ui) in 276b (ba r ch[b ui,h ui] ! (record TIME(),onL(onl)) ∥ 276b ba r ch[b ui,tl ui] ! (record TIME(),onL(onl))) ; 276c busbui(b ui,({},(bc ui,ruis),{})) 276c (ln,btt,onL(onl)) end end ) 279c 279d stop
The onL busbui behaviour deﬁnition is a similar simple transcription of the automobileaui (onL) behaviour deﬁnition. So formula lines 274–279d below presents “nothing new” !
292 – this is the “almost last formula line” !
291(a)ii onL busbui(b ui,( ,(bc ui,ruis), )) 291(a)ii (ln,btt,bpos:onL(fh ui,l ui,f,th ui)) ≡ 274 (ba r ch[b ui,h ui] ! (record TIME(),bpos); 275 busbui(b ui,({},(bc ui,ruis),{}))(ln,btt,bpos)) 290a 279(b)i (if not yet at hub(f) 279(b)i then 279(b)i1 (let incr = increment(f) in 273 let onl = (tl ui,h ui,incr,th ui) in 279(b)i2 ba−r ch[l ui,b ui] ! onL(onl) ; 279(b)i3 busbui(b ui,({},(bc ui,ruis),{}))
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

6.8 System Initialisation 153
279(b)i3 (ln,btt,onL(onl)) 279(b)i end end) 279(b)ii else 279(b)ii1 (let nl ui:L UI•nxt lui∈mereo H(℘(th ui)) in 279(b)ii2 ba r ch[thui,b ui]!atH(l ui,th ui,nxt lui) ; 279(b)ii3 busbui(b ui,({},(bc ui,ruis),{})) 279(b)ii3 (ln,btt,atH(l ui,h ui,nxt lui)) 279(b)ii1 end)end) 279c 279d stop

6.8 System Initialisation
It is one thing to deﬁne the behaviours corresponding to all parts, whether composite or atomic. It is another thing to specify an initial conﬁguration of behaviours, that is, those behaviours which “start” the overall system behaviour. The choice as to which parts, i.e., behaviours, are to represent an initial, i.e., a start system behaviour, cannot be “formalised”, it really depends on the “deeper purpose” of the system. In other words: requires careful analysis and is beyond the scope of the present monograph. We sketch a general system initialisation function. It reﬂects the decision to transcendentally deduce all parts into behaviours.
value initialise system: Unit →Unit initialise system() ≡ let ps = calc parts({uod})({}) in ∥{ let ui = uid E(p), me = mereo E(p), sv = static values(p), pv = programmable values(p) in BP(ui,me,sv)(pv) | p:E • p ∈ps end } end
Example 85 Initial States: We recall the hub, link, bus company, bus and the automobile states outlined in Sect. 3.18 on Page 73.
value 126 hs:H-set ≡≡obs sH(obs SH(obs RN(rts))) 127 ls:L-set ≡≡obs sL(obs SL(obs RN(rts))) 129 bcs:BC-set ≡obs BCs(obs SBC(obs FV(obs RN(rts)))) 130 bs:B-set ≡∪{obs Bs(bc)|bc:BC•bc ∈bcs} 131 as:A-set ≡obs BCs(obs SBC(obs FV(obs RN(rts))))
Starting Initial Behaviours: We are reaching the end of this domain modelling example. Behind us there are narratives and formalisations Item 105 Pg. 66– Item 278 Pg. 149.Based on these we now express the signature and the body of the deﬁnition of a “system build and execute” function.

293 The system to be initialised is
a the parallel compositions (∥) of b the distributed parallel composition (∥{...|...}) of all the hub behaviours, c the distributed parallel composition (∥{...|...}) of all the link behaviours, d the distributed parallel composition (∥{...|...}) of all the bus company behaviours, e the distributed parallel composition (∥{...|...}) of all the bus behaviours, and
f the distributed parallel composition (∥{...|...}) of all the automobile behaviours.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
154 6 DOMAINS – Towards a Dynamics Ontology: Perdurants
value 293 initial system: Unit →Unit 293 initial system() ≡ 293b ∥{ hubhui(h ui,me,hω)(htrf,hσ) 293b | h:H•h ∈hs, h ui:H UI•h ui=uid H(h), me:HMetL•me=mereo H(h), 293b htrf:H Trafﬁc•htrf=attr H Trafﬁc H(h), 293b hω:HΩ•hω=attr HΩ(h), hσ:HΣ •hσ=attr HΣ(h)∧hσ ∈hω } 293a 293c ∥{ linklui(l ui,me,lω)(ltrf,lσ) 293c l:L•l ∈ls, l ui:L UI•l ui=uid L(l), me:LMet•me=mereo L(l), 293c ltrf:L Trafﬁc•ltrf=attr L Trafﬁc H(l), 293c lω:LΩ•lω=attr LΩ(l), lσ:LΣ •lσ=attr LΣ(l)∧lσ ∈lω } 293a 293d ∥{ bus companybcui(bcui,me)(btt) 293d bc:BC•bc ∈bcs, bc ui:BC UI•bc ui=uid BC(bc), me:BCMet•me=mereo BC(bc), 293d btt:BusTimTbl•btt=attr BusTimTbl(bc) } 293a 293e ∥{ busbui(b ui,me)(ln,btt,bpos) 293e b:B•b ∈bs, b ui:B UI•b ui=uid B(b), me:BMet•me=mereo B(b), ln:LN:pln=attr LN(b), 293e btt:BusTimTbl•btt=attr BusTimTbl(b), bpos:BPos•bpos=attr BPos(b) } 293a 293f ∥{ automobileaui(a ui,me,rn)(apos) 293f a:A•a ∈as, a ui:A UI•a ui=uid A(a), me:AMet•me=mereo A(a), 293f rn:RegNo•rno=attr RegNo(a), apos:APos•apos=attr APos(a) }

6.9 Concurrency: Communication and Synchronisation
Translation Schemas 4, 9–11 reveal that two or more parts, which temporally coexist (i.e., at the same time), imply a notion of concurrency. Translation Schema 2 on Page 149, through the RSL/CSP language expressions ch ! v and ch ?, indicates the notions of communication and synchronisation. Other than this we shall not cover these crucial notion related to parallelism.

6.10 Discrete Actions
In the extensive Road Transport System behaviour deﬁnitions, that is, in the Automobile Behaviour at a Hub Example 83 on Page 149, the Further Behaviours of a Road Transport (Appendix) Example 84 Page 150 and the Initial System example, Example85 153, we have already “taken the lid off” the subject of action analysis & description, that is, unsystematically “revealed” aspects of action analysis & description. In this section we shall present a more systematic approach. We cannot do that for the full category of manifest domains such as we have deﬁned domains. But we can single out a a sub-category of conjoin systems.

6.10.1 Conjoin Actions
The pragmatics of conjoins include (i) for single material conjoins, the transport, along the atomic part of the material, in one or both directions; (ii) for multiple, i.e., more than one material conjoins, the treatment of one or more of these materials, mixing, heating, “cleaning”, or other; as well as possibly also the transport of one or more of these materials to or from a conjoin, from or to “an outside”, and between conjoins.
Caveat: There is, however, a problem ! The problem is that the domain phenomena that we really wish to model are not discrete in time, but continuous over time, and that we have no other means of modelling
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

6.10 Discrete Actions 155
these phenomena that using good old-fashioned mathematical analysis, that is, partial differential equations as our analysis & description tool. Why is that a problem? It is a problem because we really have no “integrated” means of mixing the discrete mathematics-based notations – as here expressed in RSL – with that of classical mathematics’ partial differential equations, PDE, while making sure that the whole thing, the two notations, RSL and PDE, together makes sense, i.e., have a meaning. Research has gone on for now almost 30 years when this is written, but no real progress has been made. The discrete formal speciﬁcation language research community, i.e., those of languages like, for example, VDM-SL, Z, RAISE, B, The B Method, et cetera, are naturally “steeped” in proof concerns where were and are not foremost in the minds of the PDE community. We refer to [10] for research papers on so-called “integrated formal methods”
So, not choosing a problematic “mixture” of RSL and PDE we settle for just expressing some properties of actions on conjoin net parts. These are actions, to repeat, on parts but they involve materials and, although they are part actions they have consequences for “their materials”. To express these operations we associate with conjoins just ﬁve simple operations: supply, pump, set valve, treat and dispose, These operations are operations “performed” by the part element of a conjoin, but they have more-or-less direct inﬂuence on the attributes of one or more of the material elements of a conjoin. There are no operations on forks, joins and pipes – what ﬂows into these units ﬂow out: is distributed, is collected and is just plainly forwarded. We shall therefore suggest an algebra of discrete operations. The inspiration for this algebra is derived from Yuri Gurevitch’s concept of evolving algebras, also now referred to as abstract state machines. We refer to [188, 103, 189, 104, 98, 103, 190, 97, 99, 104, 330, 331]. We refer to the operations that we shall suggest as discrete. That is, we shall not here consider these operations as “taking time”. We invite the reader to consider a temporal logic for domains while referring to [380, The Duration Calculus] and [263, Temporal Logic of Actions]. The conjoin operation make use of analyse part materials part and analyse part materials materials endurant analysis function prompts deﬁned in Sect. 3.15 on Page 63.

6.10.1.1 Discrete Supply of Material to Conjoins
A volume or weight amount of an appropriate substance is to be added to material m of endurant e.
let p:P = analyse part materials part(e), (m:M) = analyse part materials materials(e) in 6 m′ := supply m with x(m3|kg) of attr Substance(m)
The Supply Schema is to be understood as follows: A conjoin e, a volume or weight amount, x, and the material m of e is indicated. A speciﬁed amount, x, of material is now added to that of m of e to become the new value, m′, for that substance of e. Typically e would be a supply unit of the material network, cf. Fig. 4.2 on Page 95.

6.10.1.2 Discrete Disposal of Material from Conjoins
A volume or weight amount, x, of an appropriate substance is to be removed, i.e., disposed, from material mi of endurant e.
let p:P = analyse part materials part(e), (m:M) = analyse part materials materials(e) in m′ := dispose x(m3|kg) from m
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
156 6 DOMAINS – Towards a Dynamics Ontology: Perdurants
The Disposal Schema is to be understood as follows: A conjoin e, a volume or weight amount, x, of the material m of e is indicated. Somehow that amount of material is to be removed from that of m of e to become the new value, m′, for that substance of e.

6.10.1.3 Discrete Pumping of Material from Conjoins
We shall leave the interpretation of the following schemas, as a challenge, to the reader.
let p:P = analyse part materials part(e),
(m:M) = analyse part materials materials(e) in let (b,a) = before after conjoins(p)(), f = pumping capacity(p) in let p b:PB = analyse part materials part(b),
(m b:MB) = analyse part materials materials(b), p a:PA = analyse part materials part(a), (m a:MA) = analyse part materials materials(a) in m a′ := m a ⊖f(m a); m b′ := m b ⊕f(m a)
6.10.1.4 Discrete Opening/Closing of Material Transport by Valves
A valve is to be set at a fraction f of “ﬂow-put” where 0 ≤f ≤1.
let p:P = analyse part materials part(e),
(m: ) = analyse part materials materials(e) in 6 m′ := set valve opening at f for material m

6.10.1.5 Discrete Treatment of Materials of a Conjoin
let p:P = analyse part materials part(e),
(m1,m2,...mm) = analyse part materials materials(e) in axiom m≥1 1 := treat with a1/b of m1, c1/d of m2, ..., e1/f of mm with operation o1, 2 := treat with a2/b of m2, c2/d of m2, ..., e2/f of mm with operation o2 , ... m := treat with am/b of m1, cm/d of m2, ..., em/f of mm with operation om axiom ∀i:Nat • 1≤i≤m ⇒ai≤b ∧ci≤d ∧... ∧ei≤f ∧
∧∀(xi,y):{(ai,b),(ci,d),...,(ei,f)} • x1+x2+...+xm=y
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

6.11 Discrete Events 157
If, for some i, m′ i is to have no contribution from some mj then x j/y = 0, i.e., x j = 0. The Treatment Schema is to be understood as follows: There are up to m ‘assignments’. They are to be understood as an equation system. The [to the] right [of :=] mis all have ﬁxed, initial values. The [to the] left [of :=] m′ i denote a ﬁnal value. By value we mean that either, for all entries of an ‘assignment/equation’, we speak of Volume, or we speak of Weight. Et cetera !
You may think of the above 6s to single out the actual operations on conjoin parts. The schema text surrounding these 6 lines serve to identify the quantities involved in the operations. So the conjoin part actions are, in a sense, loosely described. We refer to Exercise 27 on Page 161.
This section ends a series of discourses on conjoins. We refer to Sect. 3.16.3 on Page 70, Example 37 on Page 71, Sect. 4.3.7 on Page 94 and Sect. 4.4.8 on Page 110. This last “installment” has been, but a sketch. We refer to Sect. 7.4 on Page 173 on Rules & Regulations, Sect. 7.5 on Page 175 on Scripts and Sect. 7.6 on Page 177 on License Languages, Pages 173–186, for a continuation of the subject.

6.11 Discrete Events
To clear any possible misunderstanding there are two kinds of events. There are the domain events that we shall analyse & describe; and there are the events of the domain description. The latter are exempliﬁed by CSP’s out/input clauses: ch[..] ! e (offer value of expression e on channel ch[..]), and ch[..] ? (accept value offered on channel ch[..]). We shall use the latter to model the former! By domain event we shall understand a change of domain state for which we do, or cannot, point out a known domain behaviour to be the cause of that event.
Example 86 We informally sketch some domain events. (i) An automobile suddenly skidding off a link or hub, thus, in sense, “disappearing” from the road net, rendering the transport domain in chaos – if we are not prepared to model the recovery, as is done in the domain, from such calamities. (ii) A pipeline unit suddenly bursting, i.e., exploding, thus, in a sense, rendering the pipeline in chaos – if we are not prepared to model the recovery, as is done in the domain, from such calamities.
We suggest to model domain events as follows. Let
be the body of a behaviour deﬁnition. Domain events that can be, say approximately, identiﬁed as taking place in a resumption of M P(ui,me’,sv)(pa’) can then be expressed in a changed deﬁnition of BP:
handle event: MT × ST × PT →MT × ST × PT
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
158 6 DOMAINS – Towards a Dynamics Ontology: Perdurants
We informally explain: (1.) is as for the “un-event” version of BP. Then modelling the occurrence of possibly not-occurring events means that the behaviour non-deterministically, line (4.), chooses the (2.3.) model or the (4.) model. (2.) either the domain analyser & describer chooses to not handle event handle eventP, and speciﬁes chaos; (3.) or the domain analyser & describer chooses to model some handling of the event – before resuming M P. (4.) In this model no event has been “detected” – and life proceeds as normal. Similar domain events occurring “during” FP can be handled likewise.
6.12 A Domain Discovery Process, III
The predecessors of this section are Sects. 3.19 on Page 75 and 4.8 on Page 118. We shall yet again emphasize some aspects of the domain analyser & describer method. A method principle is that of exhaustively analyse & describe all external qualities of the domain under scrutiny. A method technique implied here is that sketched below. The method tools are here all the analysis and description prompts covered so far.

6.12.1 Review of The Endurant Analysis and Description Process
The endurant analysis & description process is deﬁned in Sect. 4.8 on Page 118.
value endurant analysis and description: Unit →Unit endurant analysis and description() ≡ discover sorts(); discover uids(); discover mereologies(); discover attributes()
We are now to deﬁne a perdurant analysis and description procedure – to follow the above endurant analysis and description procedure.

6.12.2 A Perdurant Analysis and Description Process
We deﬁne the perdurant analysis and description procedure in the reverse order of that of Sect. 4.8 on Page 118, ﬁrst the full procedure, then its sub-procedures.
A Domain Endurant Analysis and Description Process
perdurant analysis and description: Unit →Unit perdurant analysis and description() ≡
discover state(); axiom [ Note (a) ] discover channels(); axiom [ Note (b) ] discover behaviour signatures(); axiom [ Note (c) ] discover behaviour deﬁnitions(); axiom [ Note (c) ] discover initial system() axiom [ Note (d) ]
Note (a) The State: The state variable parts maps unique identiﬁers of every part into that part. We might, perhaps should, modify “that part” into a quantity to which monitorable attribute value inquiries, attr A, apply; and nothing more, that is, “parts” devoid themselves of unique identiﬁers, mereology, and static and programmable attributes. We refrain from doing so here. Note (b) The Channels: We refer to Sect. 6.5.2 on Page 136. Thus we indiscriminately declare a channel for each pair of distinct unique part identiﬁers whether the corresponding pair of part behaviours, if at all invoked, communicate or not.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41
6.12 A Domain Discovery Process, III 159
Note (c) Discrete Behaviour Signatures and Deﬁnitions: In Sect. 6.7 on Page 142 Translation Schemas 3–11 “lump” expression of behaviour signature and deﬁnition into one RSL-Text. Here we separate the two. The reason is one of pragmatics. We ﬁnd it more productive to ﬁrst settle on the signatures of all behaviours before tackling the far more time-consuming work on deﬁning the behaviours. Note (d) The Running System: We refer to Sect. 6.8 on Page 153.

6.12.2.1 The discover state Procedure
We model the state of all parts as a globally declared variable parts, which is modelled as a map from the unique identiﬁers of parts to their [initial] value, that is, parts(ui). We need basically only model those parts, p, which have monitorable attributes, say A, as their values, attr A(p), need be read, that is attr A(parts(ui)).
value discover state: Unit →Unit discover state() ≡ for ∀v • v ∈gen do txt := txt † [type name(v)7→txt(type name(v))b⟨describe state(v)⟩] end
describe state: E →RSL-Text describe state(e) ≡❝variable parts[uid E(e)]:type name(e) := e ❞

6.12.2.2 The discover channels Procedure
We refer to Sects. 4.2.4 on Page 87 and 6.5.2 on Page 136.
value discover channels: Unit →Unit discover channels() ≡ let ch txt = ❝channel {ch[{ij,ik}]|ij,ik:UI•ij,ik∧{ij,ik}⊆all uniq ids()}:M ❞ txt := txt † [type name(uod)7→⟨ch txt⟩btxt(type name(uod))] end

6.12.2.3 The discover signatures Procedure
We refer to Sect. 6.7 on Page 142.
value discover behaviour signatures: Unit →Unit discover behaviour signatures() ≡ for ∀v • v ∈gen do let signature = is atomic(v) →⟨❝MP: UI×MT×ST →PT →IOR Unit ❞⟩, is composite(v) →⟨❝M E: UI × MT × ST →PT →IOR Unit ❞⟩ is structure(v) →⟨⟩, is part materials conjoin(v) → ⟨❝MC: UI×MT×ST →PT×(M1×M2×...×Mm) →IOR Unit ❞⟩ is material parts conjoin(v) →⟨❝MC: UI×MT×ST →PT×CM IOR Unit ❞⟩ is part parts conjoin(v) →⟨❝MC: UI×MT×ST →PT →IOR Unit ❞⟩in txt := txt † [type name(v)7→txt(type name(v))bsignature] end end
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
160 6 DOMAINS – Towards a Dynamics Ontology: Perdurants

6.12.2.4 The discover behaviour deﬁnitions Procedure
We refer to Sect. 6.7 on Page 142.
value discover behaviour deﬁnitions: Unit →Unit discover behaviour deﬁnitions() ≡ for ∀v • v ∈gen do let deﬁnition = is atomic(v) →⟨❝MP(ui,me,sv)(pv) ≡BP(ui,me,sv)(pv) ❞⟩, is composite(v) →⟨❝M E(ui,me,sv)(pv) ≡BE(ui,me,sv)(pv) ❞⟩ is structure(v) →⟨⟩, is part materials conjoin(v) →⟨❝MC(ui,me,sv)(pv,cm) ≡BP(ui,me,sv)(pv,cm) ❞⟩ is material parts conjoin(v) →⟨❝MC(uic,me,sv)(pv,cm) ≡BP(ui,me,sv)(pv,cm) ❞⟩ is part parts conjoin(v) →⟨❝MC(ui,me,sv)(pv) ≡BP(ui,me,sv)(pv) ❞⟩in txt := txt † [type name(v)7→txt(type name(v))bdeﬁnition] end end

6.12.2.5 The initialise system Procedure
We refer to Sect. 6.8 on Page 153 (for initialise system()).
value discover initial system: Unit →Unit discover initial system() ≡txt := txt † [UoD 7→txt(UoD)b⟨❝initialise system() ❞⟩]

6.13 Summary
This chapter’s main title was: DOMAINS – Towards a Dynamics Ontology. The term ‘Dynamics’ pertain to actions, events and behaviours of the ‘Domain’, not to its ‘Ontology’. So, an aspect of the ontology of a domain, such as we have studied it and such as we ordain one aspect of domain analysis & description, is also about the time-evolving occurrence, of actions, events and behaviours, that is, the perdurants. For that study & practice we have suggested a number of analysis & description prompts.
6.13.1 Method Principles, Techniques and Tools
Recall that by a method we shall understand a set of principles for selecting and applying a set of techniques using a set of tools in order to construct an artefact.
6.13.1.1 Principles of Perdurant Analysis & Description
In this chapter we have illustrated the use of the following principles:
Divide & Conquer : That concept is addressed in the sequential treatment of states, channels, behaviour signatures and behaviour deﬁnitions. Operational Abstraction : That concept is addressed in several ways: in the formulation of a notion of domain states and its modelling in terms of RSL variables; in the modelling of domain behaviour interactions in terms of CSP channels, output and input; in the capturing of one essence of domain behaviours in terms of the signature of CSP process deﬁnitions; and in the modelling of domain behaviours in terms of CSP processes.
In this chapter we have put forward some advice on description choices: We refer to Modelling Choices 10 on Page 144 and 11 on Page 146. The analysis predicates and functions are merely aids. They do not effect descriptions, but descriptions are based on the result of their inquiry. Real decisions are made when effecting a description function. So the rˆole of these modelling choice paragraphs is to alert the describer to make judicious choices.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

6.14 Exercise Problems 161
6.13.1.2 Techniques of Perdurant Analysis & Description
In this chapter we have illustrated the use of the following techniques:
Modelling Behaviours as CSP Processes: With that choice follows then the “standard” CSP techniques of tail-recursive speciﬁcation of concurrent processes/behaviours [237, 239, 238, 336, 340]. Interpretation of Internal Endurant Qualities: As part of the translation of endurant parts to CSP processes follows the interpretation of unique part identiﬁers as constant process identiﬁers; part mereologies as determinant for CSP communication channel indices; static part attributes as constant process, “by value” arguments; programmable part attributes as such process arguments that can be given new values when tail-recursively [re-]invoked; and monitorable part attributes as “residing” in RSL declared variables, one for each part having monitorable attributes.
6.13.1.3 Tools of Perdurant Analysis & Description
In this chapter we have illustrated the use of the following tools:

6.13.1.3.1 Analysis Functions
calc all chn dcls Item 261a on Page 141 calc chn refs Item 260a on Page 141 calc i o chn refs Item 259 on Page 141 moni attr types Item 201 on Page 102 moni attr vals Item 204 on Page 102 possible variable declaration Item 248 on Page 128 prgr attr types Item 202 on Page 102 prgr attr vals Item 206 on Page 103 stat attr types Item 200 on Page 102 stat attr vals Item 204 on Page 102
6.13.1.3.2 Description Schemas – Translations
possible variable declaration, 128
Translate Alternative Sorts Set, 145 Translate Atomic, 143 Translate Composite, 144 Translate Conjoin, 145
Translate Endurant, 128 Translate Material-Parts, 146 Translate Part-Materials, 145 Translate Part-Parts, 146 Translate Single Sort Set, 144 Translate Structure, 145
6.13.2 The Analysis & Description Calculus Reviewed
We have completed a ﬁrst, the main task of this monograph:in Chapter 3 the external analysis & description calculus; in Chapter 4 the internal analysis & description calculus; and in Chapter 6 the transcendental deduction of endurants into perdurants. Appendix C summarises the four languages deployed in domain analysis & description.

6.14 Exercise Problems

6.14.1 Research Problems
Exercise 27 A Research Challenge. PED Speciﬁcation of Flows in Oil Pipelines: We refer to Example 37 on Page 71, Sect. 6.10.1 on Page 154, Appendix Sect. A, and to Exercise 28 on the next page. This research problem addresses an open problem. You are to assume a domain of oil pipelines. In
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
162 6 DOMAINS – Towards a Dynamics Ontology: Perdurants
this monograph many examples and term project exercises show fragments of, respectively are intended to develop, a full domain description of road transport systems. Now you have in Appendix A a rather complete description of the endurants of an oil pipeline domain12. The problem to be studied, and for which we seek partial domain descriptions in some form of classical, and, perhaps, not so classical mathematics: partial differential equations13, PDE, is the ﬂuid dynamics14 of the ﬂow of oil in pipelines – and, for that matter, in any net of part-ﬂuid-material conjoins.
[Q1] First we ask you to set of the ﬂuid dynamics for each kind of pipeline units: well, pump, pipe, valve, fork, join and sink. [Q2] Then we ask that you, as a “little, preparatory exercise”, “glue” the ﬂuid dynamics, i.e., their mathematical equations, of pairs of pipeline units:
(well;pump), (pump;pipe), (pipe;pipe),
(pipe;valve), (valve;pipe), (pipe;fork),
(fork;(pipe|pipe))15, ((pipe|pipe);join)16, (join;pipe) and
[Q3] Finally we ask you to consider the ﬂuid dynamics of an entire pipeline system.17,18 That is, for any pipeline system we seek a deﬁnite set of possibly somehow “parameterised” deﬁnite sets of Peds, or whatever mathematics it takes, to model the full dynamics of any one such pipeline system ! Make suitable assumptions.19
[Q4] Publish the result ! [Q5] Then start thinking about how to “blend” the PDEs into an RSL speciﬁcation. What might we mean by ‘blend’?20

6.14.2 Student Exercises
Exercise 28 A PhD Student Problem. RSL Speciﬁcation of Flows in Oil Pipelines: We refer to Sect. 6.10.1 on Page 154. It is now suggested that you, in turn, one-by-one, consider the following sub-problems in the context of your domain of conjugate endurants be that of a ocean, canal and harbour (basin) system with cargo liners.
Deﬁne the external qualities of a domain of shipping lines based on the hinted waterways and vessels – and based on there being shipping lines and terminal port that own, , keep track of operate and service (load, unload) the cargo liner vessels. Deﬁne relevant internal qualities, one-by-one:
12 – Examples 13 on Page 48 [Discrete Endurants], 14 on Page 49 [Materials], 30 on Page 59 [Part-Material Conjoins: Pipelines, I] and 37 on Page 71 [Pipeline Parts and Material] addresses this issue. 13 – for example: Dale R. Durran, Numerical methods for wave equations in geophysical ﬂuid dynamics, Springer Science & Business Media, New York, 1999 14 www.sciencedirect.com/handbook/handbook-of-mathematical-ﬂuid-dynamics 15 – the | operator in (pipe|pipe) is intended to informally express that two pipes “emanate” a fork 16 – the | operator in (pipe|pipe) is intended to informally express that two pipes “enter” a join 17 Any such pipeline system has its “root” in, say, the formulas of Example 37 on Page 71 and Appendix A where we present a rather comprehensive description of the endurants of a pipeline system. 18 Recall that an “entire” road transport system is modelled by Examples 43 on Page 89, 46 on Page 91, 47 on Page 91, 48 on Page 92, 57 on Page 99, 58 on Page 100, 60 on Page 100, 62 on Page 107, 64 on Page 109, 39 on Page 74, 76 on Page 128, 80 on Page 137, 82 on Page 147, 83 on Page 149, 84 on Page 150 and 85 on Page 153. 19 Examples of assumptions are that there are deﬁned all the necessary attributes concerning pipeline units’ liquid ﬂow properties. 20 A standard concern is that of being able to carry out either mathematical logic proofs (of properties) or conventional mathematical reasoning over ‘blended’, say, RSL expressed models and classic mathematical models.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

6.14 Exercise Problems 163
unique identiﬁers, mereologies and, a small set of attributes.
Now single one or two conjugates and cargo lines and terminal ports out for consideration as behaviours. Suggest, in turn,
an overall state, a set of domain model channels, signatures of behaviours, and deﬁnition of behaviours.
Exercise 29 An MSc Student Exercise. Document System Actions: We refer to Exercises 3 on Page 81, 16 on Page 121, 17 on Page 121 and 18 on Page 122. We also refer to Sect. 6.10.1 on Page 154. [Q1] In line with the conjoin operation schemas, shown in Sect. 6.10.1, you are to provide document operation schemas for the operations mentioned in Exercises 3, 16, 17 and 18. We refer to Exercise 30.
Exercise 30 An MSc Student Exercise. Document System Behaviours: We assume and refer to exercise29. You are to narrate and formalise the full set of document system perdurants: the channels, cf. Sect. 6.5 on Page 135 and Example 80 on Page 137 the behaviour signatures, cf. Sect. 6.6 on Page 138 and Example 82 on Page 147, the behaviour deﬁnitions, cf. Sect. 6.6 on Page 138 and Example 82 on Page 147, and the initial, i.e., the ‘running’ document system, i.e., the “start-up”, cf. Sect. 6.8 on Page 153 and Example 85 on Page 153.

6.14.3 Term Projects
We continue the term projects of Sects. 3.23.3 on Page 82 and 4.12.3 on Page 122. For the speciﬁc domain topic that a group is working on it is to treat, for example, in separate, typically four, consecutive weeks, these topics in the order listed:
Channels, cf. Sect. 6.5 on Page 135 and Example 80 on Page 137; Behaviour Signatures, cf. Sect. 6.6 on Page 138 and Example 82 on Page 147; Discrete Behaviour Deﬁnitions, cf. Sect. 6.3.4 on Page 129, cf. Example 84 on Page 150; Running Systems, cf. Sect. 6.8 on Page 153 and Example 85 on Page 153.
Exercise 31 An MSc Student Exercise. The Consumer Market, Perdurants: We refer to Exercises 4 on Page 83 and 20 on Page 122.
Exercise 32 An MSc Student Exercise. Financial Service Industry, Perdurants: We refer to Exercises 5 on Page 83 and 21 on Page 123.
Exercise 33 An MSc Student Exercise. Container Line Industry, Perdurants: We refer to Exercises 6 on Page 83 and 22 on Page 123.
Exercise 34 An MSc Student Exercise. Railway Systems, Perdurants: We refer to Exercises 7 on Page 83 and 23 on Page 123.
Exercise 35 A PhD Student Problem. Part-Material Conjoins: Canals, Perdurants: We refer to Exercises 8 on Page 83 and 24 on Page 123.
Exercise 36 A PhD Student Problem. Part-Materials Conjoins: Rum Production, Perdurants: We refer to Exercises 9 on Page 83 and 25 on Page 123.
Exercise 37 A PhD Student Problem. Part-Materials Conjoins: Waste Management, Perdurants: We refer to Exercises 10 on Page 83 and 26 on Page 123.
These exercise problems are continued in Sects. 7.11.2 on Page 195 and 8.9.2 on Page 243.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark

DOMAIN FACETS
In this chapter we introduce the concept of domain facets. We cover the following facets: intrinsics, support technologies, rules and regulations, scripts, license languages, management & organisation and human behaviour.

7.1 Introduction
In Chapters 3–6 we outlined a method for analysing & and describing domains. In this chapter we cover some domain analysis & description principles and techniques not covered in Chapters 3–6. Those chapters. focused on manifest domains. Here we, on one side, go “outside” the realm of manifest domains, and, on the other side, cover, what we shall refer to as, facets, not covered in Chapters 3–6.

7.1.1 Facets of Domains
By a domain facet we shall understand one amongst a ﬁnite set of generic ways of analysing a domain: a view of the domain, such that the different facets cover conceptually different views, and such that these views together cover the domain Now, the deﬁnition of what a domain facet is can seem vague. It cannot be otherwise. The deﬁnition is sharpened by the deﬁnitions of the speciﬁc facets. You can say, that the deﬁnition of domain facet is the “sum” of the deﬁnitions of these speciﬁc facets. The speciﬁc facets – so far1 – are:
license languages (Sect. 7.6), management & organisation (Sect. 7.7) and human behaviour (Sect. 7.8).
intrinsics (Sect. 7.2), support technology (Sect. 7.3), rules & regulations (Sect. 7.4), scripts (Sect. 7.5),
Of these, the rules & regulations, scripts and license languages are closely related. Vagueness may “pop up”, here and there, in the delineation of facets. It is necessarily so. We are not in a domain of computer science, let alone mathematics, where we can just deﬁne ourselves precisely out of any vagueness problems. We are in the domain of (usually) really world facts. And these are often hard to encircle.

7.1.2 Relation to Previous Work
The present chapter is a rather complete rewrite of [52]. The reason for the rewriting was the expected publication of [78]. [52] was ﬁnalised already in 2006, 10 years ago, before the analysis & description calculus of [78] had emerged. It was time to revise [52] rather substantially.
1 We write: ‘so far’ in order to “announce”, or hint that there may be other speciﬁc facets. The one listed are the ones we have been able to “isolate”, to identify, in the most recent 10-12 years.

7.1.3 Structure of Chapter
The structure of this chapter follows the seven speciﬁc facets, as listed above. Each section, 7.2.–7.8., starts by a deﬁnition of that speciﬁc facet, Then follows an analysis of the abstract concepts involved usually with one or more examples – with these examples making up most of the section. We then “speculate” on derivable requirements thus relating the present chapter to [66]. We close each of the sections, 7.2.–7.8., with some comments on how to model the speciﬁc facet of that section.
Examples87–108 of sections 7.2–7.8 present quite a variety. In that, they reﬂect the wide spectrum of facets.
More generally, domains can be characterised by intrinsically being endurant, or function, or event, or behaviour intensive. Software support for activities in such domains then typically amount to database systems, computation-bound systems, real-time embedded systems, respectively distributed process monitoring and control systems. Other than this brief discourse we shall not cover the “intensity”-aspect of domains in this chapter.

7.2 Intrinsics
By domain intrinsics we shall understand those phenomena and concepts of a domain which are basic to any of the other facets (listed earlier and treated, in some detail, below), with such domain intrinsics initially covering at least one speciﬁc, hence named, stakeholder view

7.2.1 Conceptual Analysis
The principles and techniques of domain analysis & description, as unfolded in Chapters 3–6, focused on and resulted in descriptions of the intrinsics of domains. They did so in focusing the analysis (and hence the description) on the basic endurants and their related perdurants, that is, on those parts that most readily present themselves for observation, analysis & description.
Railway Net Intrinsics
Example 87 We narrate and formalise three railway net intrinsics. From the view of potential train passengers a railway net consists of lines, l:L, with names, ln:Ln, stations, s:S, with names sn:Sn, and trains, tn:TN, with names tnm:Tnm. A line connects exactly two distinct stations.
N, L, S, Sn, Ln, TN, Tnm value
obs Ls: N →L-set, obs Ss: N →S-set obs Ln: L →Ln, obs Sn: S →Sn obs Sns: L →Sn-set, obs Lns: S →Ln-set axiom
N, L, S, Sn and Ln designate nets, lines, stations, station names and line names. One can observe lines and stations from nets, line and station names from lines and stations, pair sets of station names from lines, and lines names (of lines) into and out from a station from stations. Axioms ensure proper graph properties of these concepts.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

7.2 Intrinsics 167
From the view of actual train passengers a railway net — in addition to the above — allows for several lines between any pair of stations and, within stations, provides for one or more platform tracks, tr:Tr, with names, trn:Trn, from which to embark on or alight from a train.
scheme N1 = extend N0 with
obs Trs: S →Tr-set, obs Trn: Tr →Trn axiom
The only additions are that of track and track name types, related observer functions and axioms. From the view of train operating staff a railway net — in addition to the above — has lines and stations consisting of suitably connected rail units. A rail unit is either a simple (i.e., linear, straight) unit, or is a switch unit, or is a simple crossover unit, or is a switchable crossover unit, etc. Simple units have two connectors. Switch units have three connectors. Simple and switchable crossover units have four connectors. A path, p:P, (through a unit) is a pair of connectors of that unit. A state, σ : Σ, of a unit is the set of paths, in the direction of which a train may travel. A (current) state may be empty: The unit is closed for trafﬁc. A unit can be in any one of a number of states of its state space, ω : Ω.
scheme N2 = extend N1 with
obs Us: (N|L|S) →U-set obs Cs: U →C-set obs Σ: U →Σ obs Ω: U →Ω axiom
Unit and connector types have been added as have concrete types for paths, unit states, unit state spaces and related observer functions, including unit state and unit state space observers.
Different stakeholder perspectives, not only of intrinsics, as here, but of any facet, lead to a number of different models. The name of a phenomenon of one perspective, that is, of one model, may coincide with the name of a “similar” phenomenon of another perspective, that is, of another model, and so on. If the intention is that the “same” names cover comparable phenomena, then the developer must state the comparison relation.
Intrinsics of Switches
Example 88 The intrinsic attribute of a rail switch is that it can take on a number of states. A simple switch ( c|Y
c ) has three connectors: {c,c|,c/}. c is the connector of the common rail from which one can
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
either “go straight” c|, or “fork” c/ (Fig. 7.1). So we have that a possible state space of such a switch
{{}, {(c,c|)},{(c|,c)},{(c,c|),(c|,c)}, {(c,c/)},{(c/,c)},{(c,c/),(c/,c)},{(c/,c),(c|,c)}, {(c,c|),(c|,c),(c/,c)},{(c,c/),(c/,c),(c|,c)},{(c/,c),(c,c|)},{(c,c/),(c|,c)}} The above models a general switch ideally. Any particular switch ωps may have ωps⊂ωgs. Nothing is said about how a state is determined: who sets and resets it, whether determined solely by the physical position of the switch gear, or also by visible or virtual (i.e., invisible, intangible) signals up or down the rail, away from the switch.
An Intrinsics of Documents
Example 89 Think of documents, written, by hand, or typed “onto” a computer text processing system. One way of considering such documents is as follows. First we abstract from the syntax that such a document, or set of more-or-less related documents, or just documents, may have: whether they are letters, with sender and receive addressees, dates written, sent and/or received, opening and closing paragraphs, etc., etc.; or they are books, technical, scientiﬁc, novels, or otherwise, or they are application forms, tax returns, patient medical records, or otherwise. Then we focus on the operations that one may perform on documents: their creation, editing, reading, copying, authorisation, “transfer”2, “freezing”3, and shredding. Finally we consider documents as manifest parts, cf. Chapter 3, Parts, so documents have unique identiﬁcations, in this case, changeable mereology, and a number of attributes. The mereology of a document, d, reﬂects those other documents upon which a document is based, i.e., refers to, and/or refers to d. Among the attributes of a document we can think of (i) a trace of what has happened to a document, i.e., a trace of all the operations performed on “that” document, since and including creation — with that trace, for example, consisting of time-stamped triples of the essence of the operations, the “actor” of the operation (i.e., the operator), and possibly some abstraction of the locale of the document when operated upon; (ii) a synopsis of what the document text “is all about”, (iii) and some “rendition” of the document text. We refer to experimental technical research report [71].
This view of documents, whether “implementable” or “implemented” or not, is at the basis of our view of license languages (for digital media, health-care (patient medical record), documents, and transport (contracts) as that facet is covered in Sect. 7.6.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

7.3 Support Technologies 169

7.2.2 Requirements
Chapter 8 illustrates requirements “derived” from the intrinsics of a road transport system – as outlined in Chapters 3–6. So the present chapter has little to add to the subject of requirements “derived” from intrinsics.

7.2.3 On Modeling Intrinsics
Chapters 3–6 outline basic principles, techniques and tools for modeling the intrinsics of manifest domains. Modeling the domain intrinsics can often be expressed in property-oriented speciﬁcation languages (like CafeOBJ [157]), model-oriented speciﬁcation languages (like Alloy [251], B [1], VDM-SL [88, 89, 154], RSL [176], or Z [374]), event-based languages (like Petri nets or [332] or CSP [238]), respectively in process-based speciﬁcation languages (like MSCs [249], LSCs [200], Statecharts [199], or CSP [238]). An area not well-developed is that of modeling continuous domain phenomena like the dynamics of automobile, train and aircraft movements, ﬂow in pipelines, etc. We refer to [302].

7.3 Support Technologies
By a domain support technology we shall understand ways and means of implementing certain observed phenomena or certain conceived concepts
The “ways and means” may be in the form of “soft technologies”: human manpower, see, however, Sect. 7.8, or in the form of “hard” technologies: electro-mechanics, etc. The term ‘implementing’ is crucial. It is here used in the sense that, ψτ, which is an ‘implementation’ of a endurant or perdurant, φ, is an extension of φ, with φ being an abstraction of ψτ. We strive for the extensions to be proof theoretic conservative extensions [274].

7.3.1 Conceptual Analysis
There are [always] basically two approaches the task of analysing & describing the support technology facets of a domain. One either stumbles over it, or one tries to tackle the issue systematically. The “stumbling” approach occurs when one, in the midst of analysing & describing a domain realises that one is tackling something that satisﬁes the deﬁnition of a support technology facet. In the systematic approach to the analysis & description of the support technology facets of a domain one usually starts with a basically intrinsics facet-oriented domain description. We then suggest that the domain engineer “inquires” of every endurant and perdurant whether it is an intrinsic entity or, perhaps a support technology.
Railway Support Technology
Example 90 We give a rough sketch description of possible rail unit switch technologies.
(i) In “ye olde” days, rail switches were “thrown” by manual labour, i.e., by railway staff assigned to and positioned at switches.
(ii) With the advent of reasonably reliable mechanics, pulleys and levers4 and steel wires, switches were made to change state by means of “throwing” levers in a cabin tower located centrally at the station (with the lever then connected through wires etc., to the actual switch).
(iii) This partial mechanical technology then emerged into electro-mechanics, and cabin tower staff was “reduced” to pushing buttons.
(iv) Today, groups of switches, either from a station arrival point to a station track, or from a station track to a station departure point, are set and reset by means also of electronics, by what is known as interlocking (for example, so that two different routes cannot be open in a station if they cross one another).
4 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pulley and http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lever
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
It must be stressed that Example 90 is just a rough sketch. In a proper narrative description the software (cum domain) engineer must describe, in detail, the subsystem of electronics, electro-mechanics and the human operator interface (buttons, lights, sounds, etc.). An aspect of supporting technology includes recording the state-behaviour in response to external stimuli. We give an example.
Probabilistic Rail Switch Unit State Transitions
Example 91 Figure 7.2 indicates a way of formalising this aspect of a supporting technology. Figure 7.2 intends to model the probabilistic (erroneous and correct) behaviour of a switch when subjected to settings (to switched (s) state) and re-settings (to direct (d) state). A switch may go to the switched state from the direct state when subjected to a switch setting s with probability psd.
sw/ess sw/esd w/1−psd−esd
di/pdd di/eds di/edd
s: Switched state d: Direct (reverted) state e: Error state
sw: Switch to switched state di: Revert to direct state
Probabilities: 0 <= p.. <= 1
pss: Switching to switched state from switched state psd: Switching to switched state from direct state pds: Reverting to direct state from switched state pds: Reverting to direct state from direct state esd: Switching to error state from direct state edd: Reverting to error state from direct state ess: Switching to error state from switched state eds: Reverting to error state from switched state
Example 92 A trafﬁc signal represents a technology in support of visualising hub states (transport net road intersection signaling states) and in effecting state changes.
294 A trafﬁc signal, ts:TS, is here5 considered a part with observable hub states and hub state spaces. Hub states and hub state spaces are programmable, respectively static attributes of trafﬁc signals. 295 A hub state space, hω, is a set of hub states such that each current hub state is in that hubs’ hub state space. 296 A hub state, hσ, is now modeled as a set of hub triples. 297 Each hub triple has a link identiﬁer li (“coming from”), a colour (red, yellow or green), and another link identiﬁer lj (“going to”). 298 Signaling is now a sequence of one or more pairs of next hub states and time intervals, ti:TI, for example: <(hσ1,ti1),(hσ2,ti2),...,(hσn−1,tin−1),(hσn,tin)>, n>0. The idea of a signaling is to ﬁrst change the designated hub to state hσ1, then wait ti1 time units, then set the designated hub to state hσ2, then wait ti2 time units, et cetera, ending with ﬁnal state σn and a
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

7.3 Support Technologies 171
(supposedly) long time interval tin before any decisions are to be made as to another signaling. The set of hub states {hσ1,hσ2,...,hσn−1} of <(hσ1,ti1),(hσ2,ti2),...,(hσn−1,tin−1),(hσn,tin)>, n>0, is called the set of intermediate states. Their purpose is to secure an orderly phase out of green via yellow to red and phase in of red via yellow to green in some order for the various directions. We leave it to the reader to devise proper well-formedness conditions for signaling sequences as they depend on the hub topology. 299 A street signal (a semaphore) is now abstracted as a map from pairs of hub states to signaling sequences. The idea is that given a hub one can observe its semaphore, and given the state, hσ (not in the above set), of the hub “to be signaled” and the state hσn into which that hub is to be signal-led “one looks up” under that pair in the semaphore and obtains the desired signaling.
type 294 TS ≡H, HΣ, HΩ value 295 attr HΣ: H,TS →HΣ 295 attr HΩ: H,TS →HΩ type 296 HΣ = Htriple-set 296 HΩ= HΣ-set 297 Htriple = LI×Colour×LI axiom 295 ∀ts:TS • attr HΣ(ts) ∈attr HΩ(ts) type 297 Colour == red | yellow | green 298 Signaling = (HΣ×TI)∗
298 TI 299 Sempahore = (HΣ×HΣ) → m Signalling value 299 attr Semaphore:TS →Sempahore
300 We treat hubs as processes with hub state spaces and semaphores as static attributes and hub states as programmable attributes. We ignore other attributes and input/outputs. 301 We can think of the change of hub states as taking place based the result of some internal, nondeterministic choice.
value 300. hub: HI × LI-set × (HΩ×Semaphore) →HΣ in ... out ... Unit 300. hub(hi,lis,(hω,sema))(hσ) ≡ 300. ... 301. ⌈⌉let hσ′:HI • ... in hub(hi,lis,(hω,sema))(signaling(hσ,hσ′)) end 300. ... 300. pre: {hσ,hσ′} ⊆hω
where we do not bother about the selection of hσ′.
302 Given two trafﬁc signal, i.e., hub states, hσinit and hσend, where hσinit designates a present hub state and hσend designates a desired next hub state after signaling. 303 Now signaling is a sequence of one or more successful hub state changes.
value 302 signaling: (HΣ×HΣ) × Semaphore →HΣ →HΣ 303 signaling(hσinit,hσend,sema)(hσ) ≡ 303 let sg = sema(hσinit,hσend) in
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
303 signal sequence(sg)(hσ) end 303 pre hσinit = hσ ∧(hσinit,hσend) ∈dom sema
If a desired hub state change fails (i.e., does not meet the pre-condition, or for other reasons (e.g., failure of technology)), then we do not deﬁne the outcome of signaling.
303 signal sequence(⟨⟩)(hσ) ≡hσ 303 signal sequence(⟨(hσ‘,ti)⟩bsg)(hσ) ≡ 303 wait(ti); signal sequence(sg)(hσ‘)
We omit expression of a number of well-formedness conditions, e.g., that the htriple link identiﬁers are those of the corresponding mereology (lis), et cetera. The design of the semaphore, for a single hub or for a net of connected hubs has many similarities with the design of interlocking tables for railway tracks [230].
Another example shows another aspect of support technology: Namely that the technology must guarantee certain of its own behaviours, so that software designed to interface with this technology, together with the technology, meets dependability requirements.
Railway Optical Gates
Example 93 Train trafﬁc (itf:iTF), intrinsically, is a total function over some time interval, from time (t:T) to continuously positioned (p:P) trains (tn:TN). Conventional optical gates sample, at regular intervals, the intrinsic train trafﬁc. The result is a sampled trafﬁc (stf:sTF). Hence the collection of all optical gates, for any given railway, is a partial function from intrinsic to sampled train trafﬁcs (stf). We need to express quality criteria that any optical gate technology should satisfy — relative to a necessary and sufﬁcient description of a closeness predicate. The following axiom does that: For all intrinsic trafﬁcs, itf, and for all optical gate technologies, og, the following must hold: Let stf be the trafﬁc sampled by the optical gates. For all time points, t, in the sampled trafﬁc, those time points must also be in the intrinsic trafﬁc, and, for all trains, tn, in the intrinsic trafﬁc at that time, the train must be observed by the optical gates, and the actual position of the train and the sampled position must somehow be check-able to be close, or identical to one another. Since units change state with time, n:N, the railway net, needs to be part of any model of trafﬁc.
NetTrafﬁc == net:N trf:(TN → m P) iTF = T →NetTrafﬁc sTF = T → m NetTrafﬁc oG = iTF ∼→sTF value
close: NetTrafﬁc × TN × NetTrafﬁc ∼→Bool axiom
∀itt:iTF, og:OG • let stt = og(itt) in
∀Tn:TN • tn ∈dom trf(itt(t))
⇒tn ∈dom trf(stt(t)) ∧close(itt(t),tn,stt(t)) end
Check-ability is an issue of testing the optical gates when delivered for conformance to the closeness predicate, i.e., to the axiom.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41
7.4 Rules & Regulations 173

7.3.2 Requirements
Section 4.4 [Extension] of [66] illustrates a possible toll-gate, whose behaviour exempliﬁes a support technology. So do pumps of a pipe-line system such as illustrated in Examples 24, 29 and 42–44 in [78]. A pump of a pipe-line system gives rise to several forms of support technologies: from the Egyptian Shadoof [irrigation] pumps, and the Hellenic Archimedian screw pumps, via the 11th century Su Song pumps of China6, and the hydraulic “technologies” of Moorish Spain7 to the centrifugal and gear pumps of the early industrial age, et cetera, The techniques – to mention those that have inﬂuenced this author – of [380, 256, 301, 230] appears to apply well to the modeling of support technology requirements.

7.3.3 On Modeling Support Technologies
Support technologies in their relation to the domain in which they reside typically reﬂect real-time embeddedness. As such the techniques and languages for modeling support technologies resemble those for modeling event and process intensity, while temporal notions are brought into focus. Hence typical modeling notations include event-based languages (like Petri nets [332] or CSP) [238]), respectively processbased speciﬁcation languages (like MSCs, [249], LSCs [200], Statecharts [199], or CSP) [238]), as well as temporal languages (like the Duration Calculus and [380] and Temporal Logic of Actions, TLA+) [263]).
7.4 Rules & Regulations
By a domain rule we shall understand some text (in the domain) which prescribes how people or equipment are expected to behave when dispatching their duties, respectively when performing their functions By a domain regulation we shall understand some text (in the domain) which prescribes what remedial actions are to be taken when it is decided that a rule has not been followed according to its intention
The domain rules & regulations need or may not be explicitly present, i.e., written down. They may be part of the “folklore”, i.e., tacitly assumed and understood.

7.4.1 Conceptual Analysis
Rule: In China the arrival and departure of trains at, respectively from, railway stations is subject to the following rule:
In any three-minute interval at most one train may either arrive to or depart from a railway station. Regulation: If it is discovered that the above rule is not obeyed, then there is some regulation which prescribes administrative or legal management and/or staff action, as well as some correction to the railway trafﬁc.
Rule: In many countries railway lines (between stations) are segmented into blocks or sectors. The purpose is to stipulate that if two or more trains are moving along the line, then:
6 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Su Song 7 http://www.islamicspain.tv/Arts-and-Science/The-Culture-of-Al-Andalus/Hydraulic-Technology.htm
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
There must be at least one free sector (i.e., without a train) between any two trains along a line. Regulation: If it is discovered that the above rule is not obeyed, then there is some regulation which prescribes administrative or legal management and/or staff action, as well as some correction to the railway trafﬁc.
At a meta-level, i.e., explaining the general framework for describing the syntax and semantics of the human-oriented domain languages for expressing rules and regulations, we can say the following: There are, abstractly speaking, usually three kinds of languages involved wrt. (i.e., when expressing) rules and regulations (respectively when invoking actions that are subject to rules and regulations). Two languages, Rules and Reg, exist for describing rules, respectively regulations; and one, Stimulus, exists for describing the form of the [always current] domain action stimuli. A syntactic stimulus, sy sti, denotes a function, se sti:STI: Θ →Θ, from any conﬁguration to a next conﬁguration, where conﬁgurations are those of the system being subjected to stimulations. A syntactic rule, sy rul:Rule, stands for, i.e., has as its semantics, its meaning, rul:RUL, a predicate over current and next conﬁgurations, (Θ × Θ) →Bool, where these next conﬁgurations have been brought about, i.e., caused, by the stimuli. These stimuli express: If the predicate holds then the stimulus will result in a valid next conﬁguration.
type Stimulus, Rule, Θ STI = Θ →Θ RUL = (Θ × Θ) →Bool value meaning: Stimulus →STI meaning: Rule →RUL valid: Stimulus × Rule →Θ →Bool valid(sy sti,sy rul)(θ) ≡meaning(sy rul)(θ,(meaning(sy sti))(θ))
A syntactic regulation, sy reg:Reg (related to a speciﬁc rule), stands for, i.e., has as its semantics, its meaning, a semantic regulation, se reg:REG, which is a pair. This pair consists of a predicate, pre reg:Pre REG, where Pre REG = (Θ × Θ) →Bool, and a domain conﬁguration-changing function, act reg:Act REG, where Act REG = Θ →Θ, that is, both involving current and next domain conﬁgurations. The two kinds of functions express: If the predicate holds, then the action can be applied. The predicate is almost the inverse of the rules functions. The action function serves to undo the stimulus function.
type Reg Rul and Reg = Rule × Reg REG = Pre REG × Act REG Pre REG = Θ × Θ →Bool Act REG = Θ →Θ value interpret: Reg →REG
The idea is now the following: Any action (i.e., event) of the system, i.e., the application of any stimulus, may be an action (i.e., event) in accordance with the rules, or it may not. Rules therefore express whether stimuli are valid or not in the current conﬁguration. And regulations therefore express whether they should be applied, and, if so, with what effort. More speciﬁcally, there is usually, in any current system conﬁguration, given a set of pairs of rules and regulations. Let (sy rul,sy reg) be any such pair. Let sy sti be any possible stimulus. And let θ be the current conﬁguration. Let the stimulus, sy sti, applied in that conﬁguration result in a next conﬁguration, θ ′, where θ ′ = (meaning(sy sti))(θ). Let θ ′ violate the rule, ∼valid(sy sti,sy rul)(θ), then if predicate part, pre reg, of the meaning of the regulation, sy reg, holds in that violating next conﬁguration, pre reg(θ,(meaning(sy sti))(θ)), then the action part, act reg, of the meaning of the regulation, sy reg, must be applied, act reg(θ), to remedy the situation.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

7.5 Scripts 175
axiom ∀(sy rul,sy reg):Rul and Reg • let se rul = meaning(sy rul), (pre reg,act reg) = meaning(sy reg) in ∀sy sti:Stimulus, θ:Θ • ∼valid(sy sti,se rul)(θ) ⇒pre reg(θ,(meaning(sy sti))(θ)) ⇒∃nθ:Θ • act reg(θ)=nθ ∧se rul(θ,nθ) end
It may be that the regulation predicate fails to detect applicability of regulations actions. That is, the interpretation of a rule differs, in that respect, from the interpretation of a regulation. Such is life in the domain, i.e., in actual reality.

7.4.2 Requirements
Implementation of rules & regulations implies monitoring and partially controlling the states symbolised by Θ in Sect. 7.4.1. Thus some partial implementation of Θ must be required; as must some monitoring of states θ:Θ and implementation of the predicates meaning, valid, interpret, pre reg and action(s) act reg. The emerging requirements follow very much in the line of support technology requirements.

7.4.3 On Modeling Rules and Regulations
Usually rules (as well as regulations) are expressed in terms of domain entities, including those grouped into “the state”, functions, events, and behaviours. Thus the full spectrum of model-ling techniques and notations may be needed. Since rules usually express properties one often uses some combination of axioms and wellformedness predicates. Properties sometimes include temporality and hence temporal notations (like Duration Calculus or Temporal Logic of Actions ) are used. And since regulations usually express state (restoration) changes one often uses state changing notations (such as found in Allard [251], B or event-B [1], RSL [176], VDM-SL [88, 89, 154], and Z [374]). In some cases it may be relevant to model using some constraint satisfaction notation [9] or some Fuzzy Logic notations [354].

7.5 Scripts
By a domain script we shall understand the structured, almost, if not outright, formally expressed, wording of a procedure on how to proceed, one that has legally binding power, that is, which may be contested in a court of law

7.5.1 Conceptual Analysis
Rules & regulations are usually expressed, even when informally so, as predicates. Scripts, in their procedural form, are like instructions, as for an algorithm.
A Casually Described Bank Script
Example 96 Our formulation amounts to just a (casual) rough sketch. It is followed by a series of four large examples. Each of these elaborate on the theme of (bank) scripts. The problem area is that of how repayments of mortgage loans are to be calculated. At any one time a mortgage loan has a balance, a most recent previous date of repayment, an interest rate and a handling fee. When a repayment occurs, then the following calculations shall take place: (i) the interest on the balance of the loan since the most recent repayment, (ii) the handling fee, normally considered ﬁxed, (iii) the effective repayment — being the difference between the repayment and the sum of the interest and the handling fee — and the new balance, being the difference between the old balance and the effective repayment. We assume repay-
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
ments to occur from a designated account, say a demand/deposit account. We assume that bank to have designated fee and interest income accounts. (i) The interest is subtracted from the mortgage holder’s demand/deposit account and added to the bank’s interest (income) account. (ii) The handling fee is subtracted from the mortgage holder’s demand/deposit account and added to the bank’s fee (income) account. (iii) The effective repayment is subtracted from the mortgage holder’s demand/deposit account and also from the mortgage balance. Finally, one must also describe deviations such as overdue repayments, too large, or too small repayments, and so on.
A Formally Described Bank Script
Example 97 First we must informally and formally deﬁne the bank state: There are clients (c:C), account numbers (a:A), mortgage numbers (m:M), account yields (ay:AY) and mortgage interest rates (mi:MI). The bank registers, by client, all accounts (ρ:A Register) and all mortgages (µ:M Register). To each account number there is a balance (α:Accounts). To each mortgage number there is a loan (ℓ:Loans). To each loan is attached the last date that interest was paid on the loan.
r, r′:Real axiom ... type
Then we must deﬁne well-formedness of the bank state:
ay:AY, mi:MI wf Bank: Bank →Bool wf Bank(ρ,α,µ,ℓ) ≡∪rng ρ = dom α ∧∪rng µ = dom ℓ axiom
We — perhaps too rigidly — assume that mortgage interest rates are higher than demand/deposit account interest rates: ay<mi. Operations on banks are denoted by the commands of the bank script language. First the syntax:
Cmd = OpA | CloA | Dep | Wdr | OpM | CloM | Pay OpA == mkOA(c:C) CloA == mkCA(c:C,a:A) Dep == mkD(c:C,a:A,p:P) Wdr == mkW(c:C,a:A,p:P) OpM == mkOM(c:C,p:P) Pay == mkPM(c:C,a:A,m:M,p:P,d:Date) CloM == mkCM(c:C,m:M,p:P) Reply = A | M | P | OkNok
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

7.6 License Languages 177
OkNok == ok | notok value
period: Date × Date →Days [for calculating interest] before: Date × Date →Bool [ﬁrst date is earlier than last date]
And then the semantics:
int Cmd(mkPM(c,a,m,p,d))(ρ,α,µ,ℓ) ≡
let (b,d′) = ℓ(m) in if α(a)≥p
let i = interest(mi,b,period(d,d′)),
((ρ,α′,µ,ℓ),nok) end end pre c ∈dom µ ∧a ∈dom α ∧m ∈µ(c) post before(d,d′)
interest: MI × Loan × Days →P
The idea about scripts is that they can somehow be objectively enforced: that they can be precisely understood and consistently carried out by all stakeholders, eventually leading to computerisation. But they are, at all times, part of the domain.

7.5.2 Requirements
Script requirements call for the possibly interactive computerisation of algorithms, that is, for rather classical computing problems. But sometimes these scripts can be expressed, computably, in the form of programs in a domain speciﬁc language. As an example we refer to [124]. [124] illustrates how the design of pension and life insurance products, and their administration, reserve calculations, and audit, can be based on a common formal notation. The notation is human-readable and machine-processable,and specialised to the actuarial domain, achieving great expressive power combined with ease of use and safety. More speciﬁcally (a) product deﬁnitions based on standard actuarial models, including arbitrary continuous-time Markov and semi-Markov models, with cyclic transitions permitted; (b) calculation descriptions for reserves and other quantities of interest, based on differential equations; and (c) administration rules.

7.5.3 On Modeling Scripts
Scripts (as are licenses) are like programs (respectively like prescriptions program executions). Hence the full variety of techniques and notations for modeling programming (or speciﬁcation) languages apply [14, 187, 334, 339, 352, 367]. [40, Chaps. 6–9] cover pragmatics, semantics and syntax techniques for deﬁning functional, imperative and concurrent programming languages.

7.6 License Languages
License: a right or permission granted in accordance with law by a competent authority to engage in some business or occupation,
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
to do some act, or to engage in some transaction which but for such license would be unlawful
Merriam Webster Online [286]

7.6.1 Conceptual Analysis

7.6.1.1 The Settings
A special form of scripts are increasingly appearing in some domains, notably the domain of electronic, or digital media. Here licenses express that a licensor, o, permits a licensee, u, to render (i.e., play) works of proprietary nature CD ROM-like music, DVD-like movies, etc. while obligating the licensee to pay the licensor on behalf of the owners of these, usually artistic works. Classical digital rights license languages, [27, 11, 121, 122, 123, 246, 117, 186, 196, 270, 293, 289, 272, 262, 337, 326, 325, 4, 294], applied to the electronic “downloading”, payment and rendering (playing) of artistic works (for example music, literature readings and movies). In this chapter we generalise such applications languages and we extend the concept of licensing to also cover work authorisation (work commitment and promises) in health care, public government and schedule transport. The digital works for these new application domains are patient medical records, public government documents and bus/train/aircraft transport contracts. Digital rights licensing for artistic works seeks to safeguard against piracy and to ensure proper payments for the rights to render these works. Health care and public government license languages seek to ensure transparent and professional (accurate and timely) health care, respectively ‘good governance’. Transport contract languages seeks to ensure timely and reliable transport services by an evolving set of transport companies. Proper mathematical deﬁnition of licensing languages seeks to ensure smooth and correct computerised management of licenses and contracts.

7.6.1.2 On Licenses
The concepts of licenses and licensing express relations between (i) actors (licensors (the authority) and licensees), (ii) entities (artistic works, hospital patients, public administration, citizen documents) and bus transport contracts and (iii) functions (on entities), and as performed by actors. By issuing a license to a licensee, a licensor wishes to express and enforce certain permissions and obligations: which functions on which entities the licensee is allowed (is licensed, is permitted) to perform. In this chapter we shall consider four kinds of entities: (i) digital recordings of artistic and intellectual nature: music, movies, readings (“audio books”), and the like, (ii) patients in a hospital as represented also by their patient medical records, (iii) documents related to public government, and (iv) transport vehicles, time tables and transport nets (of a buses, trains and aircraft).

7.6.1.3 Permissions and Obligations
The permissions and obligations issues are, (1) for the owner (agent) of some intellectual property to be paid (an obligation) by users when they perform permitted operations (rendering, copying, editing, sub-licensing) on their works; (2) for the patient to be professionally treated — by medical staff who are basically obliged to try to cure the patient; (3) for public administrators and citizens to enjoy good governance: transparency in law making (national parliaments and local prefectures and city councils), in law enforcement (i.e., the daily administration of laws), and law interpretation (the judiciary) — by agents who are basically obliged to produce certain documents while being permitted to consult (i.e., read, perhaps copy) other documents; and (4) for bus passengers to enjoy reliable bus schedules — offered by bus transport companies on contract to, say public transport authorities and on sub-contract to other such bus transport companies where these transport companies are obliged to honour a contracted schedule.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

7.6 License Languages 179

7.6.2 The Pragmatics
By pragmatics we understand the study and practice of the factors that govern our choice of language in social interaction and the effects of our choice on others.
In this section we shall rough-sketch-describe pragmatic aspects of the four domains of (1) production, distribution and consumption of artistic works, (2) the hospitalisation of patient, i.e., hospital health care, (3) the handling of law-based document in public government and (4) the operational management of schedule transport vehicles. The emphasis is on the pragmatics of the terms, i.e., the language used in these four domains.

7.6.2.1 Digital Media
Example 98 The intrinsic entities of the performing arts are the artistic works: drama or opera performances, music performances, readings of poems, short stories, novels, or jokes, movies, documentaries, newsreels, etc. We shall limit our span to the scope of electronic renditions of these artistic works: videos, CDs or other. In this chapter we shall not touch upon the technical issues of “downloading”(whether ”streaming” or copying, or other). That and other issues should be analysed in [375].

7.6.2.1.1 Operations on Digital Works:
For a consumer to be able to enjoy these works that consumer must (normally ﬁrst) usually “buy a ticket” to their performances. The consumer, i.e., the theatre, opera, concert, etc., “goer” (usually) cannot copy the performance (e.g., “tape it”), let alone edit such copies of performances. In the context of electronic, i.e., digital renditions of these performances the above “cannots” take on a new meaning. The consumer may copy digital recordings, may edit these, and may further pass on such copies or editions to others. To do so, while protecting the rights of the producers (owners, performers), the consumer requests permission to have the digital works transferred (“downloaded”) from the owner/producer to the consumer, so that the consumer can render (“play”) these works on own rendering devices (CD, DVD, etc., players), possibly can copy all or parts of them, then possibly can edit all or parts of the copies, and, ﬁnally, possibly can further license these “edited” versions to other consumers subject to payments to “original” licensor.

7.6.2.1.2 License Agreement and Obligation:
To be able to obtain these permissions the user agrees with the wording of some license and pays for the rights to operate on the digital works.
Two, related assumptions underlie the pragmatics of the electronics of the artistic works. The ﬁrst assumption is that the format, the electronic representation of the artistic works is proprietary, that is, that the producer still owns that format. Either the format is publicly known or it is not, that is, it is somehow “secret”. In either case we “derive” the second assumption (from the fulﬁllment of the ﬁrst). The second assumption is that the consumer is not allowed to, or cannot operate8 on the works by own means (software, machines). The second assumption implies that acceptance of a license results in the consumer
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
receiving software that supports the consumer in performing all operations on licensed works, their copies and edited versions: rendering, copying, editing and sub-licensing.

7.6.2.1.4 Protection of the Artistic Electronic Works:
The issue now is: how to protect the intellectual property (i.e., artistic) and ﬁnancial (exploitation) rights of the owners of the possibly rendered, copied and edited works, both when, and when not further distributed.

7.6.2.2 Health-care
Example 99 Citizens go to hospitals in order to be treated for some calamity (disease or other), and by doing so these citizens become patients. At hospitals patients, in a sense, issue a request to be treated with the aim of full or partial restitution. This request is directed at medical staff, that is, the patient authorises medical staff to perform a set of actions upon the patient. One could claim, as we shall, that the patient issues a license.

7.6.2.2.1 Patients and Patient Medical Records:
So patients and their attendant patient medical records (PMRs) are the main entities, the “works” of this domain. We shall treat them synonymously: PMRs as surrogates for patients. Typical actions on patients — and hence on PMRs — involve admitting patients, interviewing patients, analysing patients, diagnosing patients, planning treatment for patients, actually treating patients, and, under normal circumstance, to ﬁnally release patients.
Medical staff may request (‘refer’ to) other medical staff to perform some of these actions. One can conceive of describing action sequences (and ‘referrals’) in the form of hospitalisation (not treatment) plans. We shall call such scripts for licenses.

7.6.2.2.3 Professional Health Care:
The issue is now, given that we record these licenses, their being issued and being honoured, whether the handling of patients at hospitals follow, or does not follow properly issued licenses.

7.6.2.3 Government Documents
Example 100 By public government we shall, following Charles de Secondat, baron de Montesquieu (1689–1755)9, understand a composition of three powers: the law-making (legislative), the law-enforcing and the law-interpreting parts of public government. Typically national parliament and local (province and city) councils are part of law-making government. Law-enforcing government is called the executive (the administration). And law-interpreting government is called the judiciary [system] (including lawyers etc.).
A crucial means of expressing public administration is through documents.10 We shall therefore provide a brief domain analysis of a concept of documents. (This document domain description also applies to
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

7.6 License Languages 181
patient medical records and, by some “light” interpretation, also to artistic works — insofar as they also are documents.) Documents are created, edited and read; and documents can be copied, distributed, the subject of calculations (interpretations) and be shared and shredded.
With documents one can associate, as attributes of documents, the actors who created, edited, read, copied, distributed, shared, performed calculations and shredded documents. With these operations on documents, and hence as attributes of documents one can, again conceptually, associate the location and time of these operations.

7.6.2.3.3 Actor Attributes and Licenses:
With actors (whether agents of public government or citizens) one can associate the authority (i.e., the rights) these actors have with respect to performing actions on documents. We now intend to express these authorisations as licenses.
An issue of public government is whether citizens and agents of public government act in accordance with the laws — with actions and laws reﬂected in documents such that the action documents enables a trace from the actions to the laws “governing” these actions. We shall therefore assume that every document can be traced back to its law-origin as well as to all the documents any one document-creation or -editing was based on.

7.6.2.4 Transportation
Transportation is one of the prime areas for domain analysis & description: roads and vehicles: private automobiles, buses, trucks, etc., aircraft, shipping, trains.
Passenger and Goods Transport
Contracts obligate transport companies to deliver bus trafﬁc according to a timetable. The timetable is part of the contract. A contractor may sub-contract (other) transport companies to deliver bus trafﬁc according to timetables that are sub-parts of their own timetable. Contractors are either public transport authorities or contracted transport companies. Contracted transport companies may cancel a subset of bus rides provided the total amount of cancellations per 24 hours for each bus line does not exceed a contracted upper limit The cancellation rights are spelled out in the contract. A sub-contractor cannot increase a contracted upper limit for cancellations above what the sub-contractor was told (in its contract) by its contractor. Et cetera.

7.6.2.4.2 A Pragmatics and Semantics Analysis:
The “works” of the bus transport contracts are two: the timetables and, implicitly, the designated (and obligated) bus trafﬁc. A bus timetable appears to deﬁne one or more bus lines, with each bus line giving rise to one or more bus rides. Nothing is (otherwise) said about regularity of bus rides. It appears that bus ride cancellations must be reported back to the contractor. And we assume that cancellations by a sub-contractor is further reported back also to the sub-contractor’s contractor. Hence eventually that the public transport authority is notiﬁed. Nothing is said, in the contracts, such as we shall model them, about passenger fees for bus rides nor of percentages of proﬁts (i.e., royalties) to be paid back from a subcontractor to the contractor. So we shall not bother, in this example, about transport costs nor transport
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
subsidies. But will leave that necessary aspect as an exercise. The opposite of cancellations appears to be ‘insertion’ of extra bus rides, that is, bus rides not listed in the time table, but, perhaps, mandated by special events11 We assume that such insertions must also be reported back to the contractor. We assume concepts of acceptable and unacceptable bus ride delays. Details of delay acceptability may be given in contracts, but we ignore further descriptions of delay acceptability. but assume that unacceptable bus ride delays are also to be (iteratively) reported back to contractors. We ﬁnally assume that sub-contractors cannot (otherwise) change timetables. (A timetable change can only occur after, or at, the expiration of a license.) Thus we ﬁnd that contracts have deﬁnite period of validity. (Expired contracts may be replaced by new contracts, possibly with new timetables.)
7.6.2.4.3 Contracted Operations, An Overview:
The actions that may be granted by a contractor according to a contract are: (i) start: to commence, i.e., to start, a bus ride (obligated); (ii) end: to conclude a bus ride (obligated); (iii) cancel: to cancel a bus ride (allowed, with restrictions); (iv) insert: to insert a bus ride; and (v) subcontract: to sub-contract part or all of a contract.

7.6.3 Schematic Rendition of License Language Constructs
There are basically two aspects to licensing languages: (i) the [actual] licensing [and sub-licensing], in the form of licenses, ℓ, by licensors, o, of permissions and thereby implied obligations, and (ii) the carryingout of these obligations in the form of licensee, u, actions. We shall treat licensors and licensees on par, that is, some os are also us and vice versa. And we shall think of licenses as not necessarily material entities (e.g., paper documents), but allow licenses to be tacitly established (understood).

7.6.3.1 Licensing
The granting of a license ℓby a licensor o, to a set of licensees uu1,uu2,...,uuu in which ℓexpresses that these may perform actions aa1,aa2,...,aaa on work items ee1,ee2,...,eee can be schematised:
ℓ: licensor o contracts licensees {uu1,uu2,...,uuu} to perform actions {aa1,aa2,...,aaa} on work items {ee1,ee2,...,eee} allowing sub-licensing of actions {aai,aaj,...,aak} to {uux,uuy,...,uuz}
The two sets of action designators, das :{aa1,aa2,...,aaa} and sas :{aax,aay,...,aaz} need not relate. Sublicensing: Line 3 of the above schema, ℓ, expresses that licensees uu1,uu2,...,uuu, may act as licensors and (thereby sub-)license ℓto licensees us : {uux,uuy,...,uuz}, distinct from sus : {uu1,uu2,...,uuu}, that is, us∩sus = {}. Variants: One can easily “cook up” any number of variations of the above license schema. Revoke Licenses: We do not show expressions for revoking part or all of a previously granted license.

7.6.3.2 Licensors and Licensees
Licensors and Licensees
For digital media the original licensors are the original producers of music, ﬁlm, etc. The “original” licensees are you and me ! Thereafter some of us may become licensors, etc.
For health-care the original licensors are, say in Denmark, the Danish governments’ National Board of Health12; and the “original” licensees are the national hospitals. These then sub-license their medical clin-
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

7.6 License Languages 183
ics (rheumatology, cancer, urology, gynecology, orthopedics, neurology, etc.) which again sub-licenses their medical staff (doctors, nurses, etc.). A medical doctor may, as is the case in Denmark for certain actions, not [necessarily] perform these but may sub-license their execution to nurses, etc.
For government documents the original licensor are the (i) heads of parliament, regional and local governments, (ii) government (prime minister) and the heads of respective ministries, respectively the regional and local agencies and administrations. The “original” licensees are (i′) the members of parliament, regional and local councils charged with drafting laws, rules and regulations, (ii′) the ministry, respectively the regional and local agency department heads. These (the ′s) then become licensors when licensing their staff to handle speciﬁc documents.
For scheduled passenger (etc.) transportation the original licensors are the state, regional and/or local transport authorities. The “original” licensees are the public and private transport ﬁrms. These latter then become licensors licensors licensing drivers to handle speciﬁc transport lines and/or vehicles.

7.6.3.3 Actors and Actions
In preparation for Example103 we show Figure 7.3.
More Analysis Planning ?

YES YES
Analysis follow−up ?
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
w refers to a digital “work” with w′ designating a newly created one; si refers to a sector of some work.
render w(si,sj,...,sk): sectors si,sj,...,sk of work w are rendered (played, visualised) in that order. w′ := copy w(si,sj,...,sk): sectors si,sj,...,sk of work w are copied and becomes work w′. w′ := edit w with E (wα(sa,sb,...,sc),...,wγ(sp,sq,...,sr)): work w is edited while [also] incorporating references to or excerpts from [other] works wα(sa,sb,...,sc),...,wγ(sp,sq,...,sr). read w: work w is read, i.e., information about work w is somehow displayed.
ℓ: licensor m contracts licensees {uu1,uu2,...,uuu} to perform actions {RENDER, COPY, EDIT, READ} on work items {wi1,wi2,...,wiw}.
Et cetera: other forms of actions can be thought of.
Actors are here limited to the patients and the medical staff. We refer to Fig. 7.3 on the previous page. It shows an archetypal hospitalisation plan. It identiﬁes a number of actions; π designates patients, t designates treatment (medication, surgery, ...). Actions are performed by medical staff, say h, with h being an implicit argument of the actions.
interview π: a PMR with name, age, family relations, addresses, etc., is established for patient π. admit π: the PMR records the anamnese (medical history) for patient π. establish analysis plan π: the PMR records which analyses (blood tests, ECG, blood pressure, etc.) are to be carried out. analyse π: the PMR records the results of the analyses referred to previously. diagnose π: medical staff h diagnoses, based on the analyses most recently performed. plan treatment for π: medical staff h sets up a treatment plan for patient π based on the diagnosis most recently performed. treat π wrt. t: medical staff h performs treatment t on patient π, observes “reaction” and records this in the PMR. Predicate “actions”: more analysis π ?, more treatment π ? and more diagnosis π ?. release π: either the patient dies or is declared ready to be sent ’home’. ℓ: licensor o contracts medical staff {mm1,mm2,...,mmm} to perform actions
plan analysis, analyse,
diagnose, plan treatment,
on patients {πp1,πp2,...,πpp}.
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

7.6 License Languages 185
Et cetera: other forms of actions can be thought of.
d refer to documents with d′ designating new documents.
READ, COPY, FREEZE, SHRED} on documents {dd1,dd2,...,ddd}.
Et cetera: other forms of actions can be thought of.
We restrict, without loss of generality, to bus transport. There is a timetable, tt. It records bus lines,l, and speciﬁc instances of bus rides, b. These are some archetypal operations: start bus ride l,b at time t: Bus line l is recorded in tt and its departure in tt is recorded as τ. Starting that bus ride at t means that the start is either on time, i.e., t=τ, or the start is delayed δd : τ-t or advanced δa : t-τ where δd and δa are expected to be small intervals. All this is to be reported, in due time, to the contractor. end bus ride l,b at time t: Ending bus ride l,b at time t means that it is either ended on time, or earlier, or delayed. This is to be reported, in due time, to the contractor. cancel bus ride l,b at time t: t must be earlier than the scheduled departure of bus ride l,b. insert an extra bus l,b′ at time t: t must be the same time as the scheduled departure of bus ride l,b with b′ being a “marked” version of b. ℓ: licensor o contracts transport staff {bb1,bb2,...,bbb} to perform actions {START, END,
CANCEL, INSERT} on work items {ee1,ee2,...,eee}.
Et cetera: other forms of actions can be thought of.

7.6.4 Requirements
Requirements for license language implementation basically amounts to requirements for three aspects. (i) The design of the license language, its abstract and concrete syntax, its interpreter, and its interfaces to distributed licensor and licensee behaviours; (ii) the requirements for a distributed system of licensor and licensee behaviours; and (iii) the monitoring and partial control of the states of licensor and licensee behaviours. The structuring of these distributed licensor and licensee behaviours differ from slightly to somewhat, but not that signiﬁcant in the four license languages examples. Basically the licensor and licensee behaviours form a set of behaviours. Basically everyone can communicate with everyone. For the case of digital media licensee behaviours communicate back to licensor behaviours whenever a properly licensed action is performed – resulting in the transfer of funds from licensees to licensors. For the case of health care some central authority is expected to validate the granting of licenses and appear to be bound by medical training. For the case of documents such checks appear to be bound by predetermined authorisation rules. For the case of transport one can perhaps speak of more rigid management & organisation dependencies as licenses are traditionally transferred between independent authorities and companies.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark

7.6.5 On Modeling License Languages
Licensors are expected to maintain a state which records all the licenses it has issued. Whenever at licensee “reports back” (the begin and/or the end) of the performance of a granted action, this is recorded in its state. Sometimes these granted actions are subject to fees. The licensor therefore calculates outstanding fees — etc. Licensees are expected to maintain a state which records all the licenses it has accepted. Whenever an action is to be performed the licensee records this and checks that it is permitted to perform this action. In many cases the licensee is expected to “report back”, both the beginning and the end of performance of that action, to the licensor. A typical technique of modeling licensors, licensees and patients, i.e., their PMRs, is to model them as (never ending) processes, a la CSP [238]. with input/output, ch ?/ch ! m, communications between licensors, licensees and PMRs. Their states are modeled as programmable attributes.
7.7 Management & Organisation
By domain management we shall understand such people (such decisions) (i) who (which) determine, formulate and thus set standards (cf. rules and regulations, Sect. 7.4) concerning strategic, tactical and operational decisions; (ii) who ensure that these decisions are passed on to (lower) levels of management and to ﬂoor staff; (iii) who make sure that such orders, as they were, are indeed carried out; (iv) who handle undesirable deviations in the carrying out of these orders cum decisions; and (v) who “backstops” complaints from lower management levels and from “ﬂoor” staff
By domain organisation we shall understand (vi) the structuring of management and nonmanagement staff “oversee-able” into clusters with “tight” and “meaningful” relations; (vii) the allocation of strategic, tactical and operational concerns to within management and nonmanagement staff clusters; and hence (viii) the “lines of command”: who does what, and who reports to whom, administratively and functionally
The ‘&’ is justiﬁed from the interrelations of items (i–viii).

7.7.1 Conceptual Analysis
We ﬁrst bring some examples.
Example 104 In China, as an example, till the early 1990s, rescheduling of trains occurs at stations and involves telephone negotiations with neighbouring stations (“up and down the lines”). Such rescheduling negotiations, by phone, imply reasonably strict management and organisation (M&O). This kind of M&O reﬂects the geographical layout of the rail net.
Railway Management and Organisation: Train Monitoring, II
Example 105 We single out a rather special case of railway management and organisation. Certain (lowest-level operational and station-located) supervisors are responsible for the day-to-day timely progress of trains within a station and along its incoming and outgoing lines, and according to given timetables. These supervisors and their immediate (middle-level) managers (see below for regional managers) set guidelines (for local station and incoming and outgoing lines) for the monitoring of train trafﬁc, and for controlling trains that are either ahead of or behind their schedules. By an incoming and an outgoing line we mean part of a line between two stations, the remaining part being handled by neighbouring station management. Once it has been decided, by such a manager, that a train is not following its schedule, based on information monitored by non-management staff, then that manager directs that staff: (i) to suggest a new schedule for the train in question, as well as for possibly affected other trains, (ii) to negotiate the new schedule with appropriate neighbouring stations, until a proper reschedule can be de-
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41
7.7 Management & Organisation 187
cided upon, by the managers at respective stations, (iii) and to enact that new schedule.13 A (middle-level operations) manager for regional trafﬁc, i.e., train trafﬁc involving several stations and lines, resolves possible disputes and conﬂicts.
The above, albeit rough-sketch description, illustrated the following management and organisation issues: (i) There is a set of lowest-level (as here: train trafﬁc scheduling and rescheduling) supervisors and their staff; (ii) they are organised into one such group (as here: per station); (iii) there is a middle-level (as here: regional train trafﬁc scheduling and rescheduling) manager (possibly with some small staff), organised with one such per suitable (as here: railway) region; and (iv) the guidelines issued jointly by local and regional (...) supervisors and managers imply an organisational structuring of lines of information provision and command. People staff enterprises, the components of infrastructures with which we are concerned, i.e., for which we develop software. The larger these enterprises — these infrastructure components — the more need there is for management and organisation. The role of management is roughly, for our purposes, twofold: ﬁrst, to perform strategic, tactical and operational work, to set strategic, tactical and operational policies — and to see to it that they are followed. The role of management is, second, to react to adverse conditions, that is, to unforeseen situations, and to decide how they should be handled, i.e., conﬂict resolution. Policy setting should help non-management staff operate normal situations — those for which no management interference is thus needed. And management “backstops” problems: management takes these problems off the shoulders of non-management staff. To help management and staff know who’s in charge wrt. policy setting and problem handling, a clear conception of the overall organisation is needed. Organisation deﬁnes lines of communication within management and staff, and between these. Whenever management and staff has to turn to others for assistance they usually, in a reasonably well-functioning enterprise, follow the command line: the paths of organigrams — the usually hierarchical box and arrow/line diagrams. The management and organisation model of a domain is a partial speciﬁcation; hence all the usual abstraction and modeling principles, techniques and tools apply. More speciﬁcally, management is a set of predicate functions, or of observer and generator functions These either parametrise other, the operations functions, that is, determine their behaviour, or yield results that become arguments to these other functions. Organisation is thus a set of constraints on communication behaviours. Hierarchical, rather than linear, and matrix structured organisations can also be modeled as sets (of recursively invoked sets) of equations. To relate classical organigrams to formal descriptions we ﬁrst show such an organigram (Fig. 7.4 on the following page), and then we show schematic processes which — for a rather simple scenario — model managers and the managed! Based on such a diagram, and modeling only one neighbouring group of a manager and the staff working for that manager we get a system in which one manager, mgr, and many staff, stf, coexist or work concurrently, i.e., in parallel. The mgr operates in a context and a state modeled by ψ. Each staff, stf(i) operates in a context and a state modeled by sσ(i).
type Msg, Ψ, Σ, Sx SΣ = Sx → m Σ channel { ms[i]:Msg | i:Sx } value sσ:SΣ, ψ:Ψ
sys: Unit →Unit sys() ≡∥{ stf(i)(sσ(i)) | i:Sx } ∥mgr(ψ)
In this system the manager, mgr, (1) either broadcasts messages, m, to all staff via message channel ms[i]. The manager’s concoction, m out(ψ), of the message, msg, has changed the manager state. Or (2) is willing to receive messages, msg, from whichever staff i the manager sends a message. Receipt of the message changes, m in(i,m)(ψ), the manager state. In both cases the manager resumes work as from the
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
7.7 Management & Organisation 189
Example 106 We think of (i) strategic, (ii) tactic, and (iii) operational managers as well as (iv) supervisors, (v) team leaders and the rest of the (vi) staff (i.e., workers) of a domain enterprise as functions. Each category of staff, i.e., each function, works in state and updates that state according to schedules and resource allocations — which are considered part of the state. To make the description simple we do not detail the state other than saying that each category works on an “instantaneous copy” of “the” state. Now think of six staff category activities, strategic managers, tactical managers, operational managers, supervisors, team leaders and workers as six simultaneous sets of actions. Each function deﬁnes a step of collective (i.e., group) (strategic, tactical, operational) management, supervisor, team leader and worker work. Each step is considered “atomic”. Now think of an enterprise as the “repeated” step-wise simultaneous performance of these category activities. Six “next” states arise. These are, in the reality of the domain, ameliorated, that is reconciled into one state. however with the next iteration, i.e., step, of work having each category apply its work to a reconciled version of the state resulting from that category’s previously yielded state and the mediated “global” state. Caveat: The below is not a mathematically proper deﬁnition. It suggests one !
0. Σ is a further undeﬁned and unexplained enterprise state space. The various enterprise players view this state in their own way. 1. Six staff group operations, str, tac, opr, sup, tea and wrk, each act in the enterprise state such as conceived by respective groups to effect a resulting enterprise state such as achieved by respective groups. 2. Six staff group state amelioration functions, ame s,ame t, ame o, ame u, ame e and ame w, each apply to the resulting enterprise states such as achieved by respective groups to yield a result state such as achieved by that group. 3. An overall objective function tests whether a state summary reﬂects that the objectives of the enterprise has been achieved or not. 4. The enterprise function applies to the tuple of six group-biased (i.e., ameliorated) states. Initially these may all be the same state. The result is an ameliorated state. 5. An iteration, that is, a step of enterprise activities, lines 5.–13. proceeds as follows: 6. strategic management operates
in its state space, σs : Σ; effects a next (un-ameliorated strategic management) state σ′ and ameliorates this latter state in the context of all the other player’s ameliorated result states. 7.–11. The same actions take place, simultaneously for the other players: tac, opr, sup, tea and wrk.
12. A test, has objectives been met, is made on the six ameliorated states. 13. If test is successful, then the enterprise terminates in an ameliorated state.
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
14. Otherwise the enterprise recurses, that is, “repeats” itself in new states.
The above “function” deﬁnition is suggestive. It suggests that a solution to the ﬁx-point 6-tuple of equations over “intermediate” states, σ′ x, where x is any of s,t,o,u,e,w, is achieveable by iteration over just these 6 equations.

7.7.2 Requirements
Top-level, including strategic management tends to not be amenable to “automation”. Increasingly tactical management tends to “divide” time between “bush-ﬁre, stop-gap” actions – hardly automatable and formulating, initiating and monitoring main operations. The initiation and monitoring of tactical actions appear amenable to partial automation. Operational management – with its reliance on rules & regulations, scripts and licenses – is where computer monitoring and partial control has reaped the richest harvests.

7.7.3 On Modeling Management and Organisation
Management and organisation basically spans entity, function, event and behaviour intensities and thus typically require the full spectrum of modeling techniques and notations — summarised in Sect. 7.2.3.

7.8 Human Behaviour
By domain human behaviour we shall understand any of a quality spectrum of carrying out assigned work: from (i) careful, diligent and accurate, via (ii) sloppy dispatch, and (iii) delinquent work, to (iv) outright criminal pursuit
Although we otherwise do not go into any depth with respect to the analysis & description of humans, we shall momentarily depart from this “abstinence”.

7.8.1 Conceptual Analysis
To model human behaviour “smacks” like modeling human actors, the psychology of humans, etc. ! We shall not attempt to model the psychological side of humans — for the simple reason that we neither know how to do that nor whether it can at all be done. Instead we shall be focusing on the effects on non-human manifest entities of human behaviour.
Banking — or Programming — Staff Behaviour
Example 107 Let us assume a bank clerk, “in ye olde” days, when calculating, say mortgage repayments (cf. Example 96). We would characterise such a clerk as being diligent, etc., if that person carefully follows the mortgage calculation rules, and checks and double-checks that calculations “tally up”, or lets others do so. We would characterise a clerk as being sloppy if that person occasionally forgets the checks alluded to above. We would characterise a clerk as being delinquent if that person systematically forgets these checks. And we would call such a person a criminal if that person intentionally miscalculates in such a way that the bank (and/or the mortgage client) is cheated out of funds which, instead, may be diverted to the cheater. Let us, instead of a bank clerk, assume a software programmer charged with implementing an automatic routine for effecting mortgage repayments (cf. Example 96). We would characterise the programmer as being diligent if that person carefully follows the mortgage calculation rules, and throughout the development veriﬁes and tests that the calculations are correct with respect to the rules. We would characterise the programmer as being sloppy if that person forgets certain checks and tests when otherwise correcting the computing program under development. We would characterise the programmer as being delinquent if that person systematically forgets these checks
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

7.8 Human Behaviour 191
and tests. And we would characterise the programmer as being a criminal if that person intentionally provides a program which miscalculates the mortgage interest, etc., in such a way that the bank (and/or the mortgage client) is cheated out of funds.
A Human Behaviour Mortgage Calculation
Example 108 Example 96 on Page 175 gave a semantics to the mortgage calculation request (i.e., command) as would a diligent bank clerk be expected to perform it. To express, that is, to model, how sloppy, delinquent, or outright criminal persons (staff?) could behave we must modify the int Cmd(mkPM(c,a,m,p,d′))(ρ,α,µ,ℓ) deﬁnition.
int Cmd(mkPM(c,a,m,p,d))(ρ,α,µ,ℓ) ≡
let (b,d′) = ℓ(m) in if q(α(a),p) [α(a)≤p∨α(a)=p∨α(a)≤p∨...]
let i = f1(interest(mi,b,period(d,d′))),
((ρ,α′,µ,ℓ),nok) end end pre c ∈dom µ ∧m ∈µ(c)
q: P × P ∼→Bool f1,f2,f3,f4,f“staff”: P ∼→P [typically: f“staff” = λp.p]
The predicate q and the functions f1, f2, f3, f4 and f“staff” of Example 108 are deliberately left undeﬁned. They are being deﬁned by the “staffer” when performing (incl., programming) the mortgage calculation routine. The point of Example 108 is that one must ﬁrst deﬁne the mortgage calculation script precisely as one would like to see the diligent staff (programmer) to perform (incl., correctly program) it before one can “pinpoint” all the places where lack of diligence may “set in”. The invocations of q, f1, f2, f3, f4 and
f“staff” designate those places. The point of Example 108 is also that we must ﬁrst domain-deﬁne, “to the best of our ability” all the places where human behaviour may play other than a desirable role. If we cannot, then we cannot claim that some requirements aim at countering undesirable human behaviour.
Commensurate with the above, humans interpret rules and regulations differently, and, for some humans, not always consistently — in the sense of repeatedly applying the same interpretations. Our ﬁnal speciﬁcation pattern is therefore:
Action = Θ ∼→Θ-infset value
hum int: Rule →Θ →RUL-infset action: Stimulus →Θ →Θ hum beha: Stimulus × Rules →Action →Θ ∼→Θ-infset hum beha(sy sti,sy rul)(α)(θ) as θset
θset = α(θ) ∧action(sy sti)(θ) ∈θset
∧∀θ ′:Θ •θ ′ ∈θset ⇒
∃se rul:RUL•se rul ∈hum int(sy rul)(θ)⇒se rul(θ,θ ′)
August 16, 2020, 11:41, A Foundation for Software Development © Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark
The above is, necessarily, sketchy: There is a possibly inﬁnite variety of ways of interpreting some rules. A human, in carrying out an action, interprets applicable rules and chooses one which that person believes suits some (professional, sloppy, delinquent or criminal) intent. “Suits” means that it satisﬁes the intent, i.e., yields true on the pre/post-conﬁguration pair, when the action is performed — whether as intended by the ones who issued the rules and regulations or not. We do not cover the case of whether an appropriate regulation is applied or not. The above-stated axioms express how it is in the domain, not how we would like it to be. For that we have to establish requirements.

7.8.2 Requirements
Requirements in relation to the human behaviour facet is not requirements about software that “replaces” human behaviour. Such requirements were hinted at in Sects. 7.5.2–7.7.2. Human behaviour facet requirements are about software that checks human behaviour; that its remains diligent; that it does not transgress into sloppy, delinquent, let alone criminal behaviour. When transgressions are discovered, appropriate remedial actions may be prescribed.

7.8.3 On Modeling Human Behaviour
To model human behaviour is, “initially”, much like modeling management and organisation. But only ‘initially’. The most signiﬁcant human behaviour modeling aspect is then that of modeling non-determinism and looseness, even ambiguity. So a speciﬁcation language which allows specifying non-determinism and looseness (like CafeOBJ [157] and RSL [176]) is to be preferred. To prescribe requirements is to prescribe the monitoring of the human input at the computer interface.

7.9 Summary
7.9.1 Method Principles, Techniques and Tools
Recall that by a method we shall understand a set of principles for selecting and applying a set of techniques using a set of tools in order to construct an artefact.

7.9.1.1 Principles of Modelling Domain Facets
We shall just point out one applied principle, that of:
Conservative Extension :14 This principle of making sure that additional domain descriptions form conservative extensions are applied throughout this chapter:
Support Technologies, Sect. 7.3, Rules & Regulations, Sect. 7.4, Scripts, Sect. 7.5,
License Languages, Sect. 7.6, Management & Organisation, Sect. 7.7 and Human Behaviour, Sect. 7.8.
The concepts of these six additional facets builds upon, i.e., extends, those of Intrinsics, that is, those of Chapters 3–6.
Most of the principles mentioned in earlier chapters have also been applied.
14 We remind the reader of the deﬁnition of the concept of ‘conservative extension: An extension of a logical theory is conservative, i.e., conserves, if every theorem expressible in the original theory is also derivable within the original theory [en.wiktionary.org/wiki/conservative extension] [[ι 47,π 7]]. See also [341, 144, 100, 20, 243, 161] and en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extension by new constant and function names
© Dines Bjørner 2020, Fredsvej 11, DK–2840 Holte, Denmark Domain Science & Engineering August 16, 2020, 11:41

7.9 Summary 193

7.9.1.2 Techniques of Modelling Domain Facets
We have already mentioned techniques that have been applied in this chapter’s “On Modelling ...” sections: Sects. 7.2.3 on Page 169, 7.3.3 on Page 173, 7.4.3 on Page 175, 7.5.3 on Page 177, 7.6.5 on Page 186, 7.7.3 on Page 190 and 7.8.3 on the facing page. And shall leave it at that.

7.9.1.3 Tools of Modelling Domain Facets
The tools for modelling, i.e., analysing & describing domain facets have already been mentioned in this chapters seven sections on the individual facets.

7.9.2 General Issues

7.9.2.1 Completion
Domain acquisition results in typically up to thousands of units of domain descriptions. Domain analysis subsequently also serves to classify which facet any one of these description units primarily characterises. But some such “compartmentalisations” may be difﬁcult, and may be deferred till the step of “completion”. It may then be, “at the end of the day”, that is, after all of the above facets have been modeled that some description units are left as not having been described, not deliberately, but “circumstantially”. It then behooves the domain engineer to ﬁt these “dangling” description units into suitable parts of the domain description. This “slotting in” may be simple, and all is ﬁne. Or it may be difﬁcult. Such difﬁculty may be a sign that the chosen model, the chosen description, in its selection of entities, functions, events and behaviours to model — in choosing these over other possible selections of phenomena and concepts is not appropriate. Another attempt must be made. Another selection, another abstraction of entities, functions, etc., may need be chosen. Usually however, after having chosen the abstractions of the intrinsic phenomena and concepts, one can start checking whether “dangling” description units can be ﬁtted in “with ease”.

7.9.2.2 Integrating Formal Descriptions
We have seen that to model the full spectrum of domain facets one needs not one, but several speciﬁcation languages. No single speciﬁcation language sufﬁces. It seems highly unlikely and it appears not to be desirable to obtain a single, “universal” speciﬁcation language capable of “equally” elegantly, suitably abstractly modeling all aspects of a domain. Hence one must conclude that the full modeling of domains shall deploy several formal notations – including plain, good old mathematics in all its forms. The issues are then the following which combinations of notations to select, and how to make sure that the combined speciﬁcation denotes something meaningful. The ongoing series of “Integrating Formal Methods” conferences [10] is a good source for techniques, compositions and meanings.
